SELF-ASSESSMENT
AND BOARD REVIEW
HARRISON'S
INTERNAL
MEDICINE
Editorial Board
ANTHONY S. FAUCI, MD
Chief, Laboratory of Immunoregulation
Director, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious DiseasesNational Institutes of Health Bethesda
EUGENE BRAUNWALD, MD
Distinguished Hersey Professor of MedicineHarvard Medical SchoolChairman, TIMI Study Group, Brigham and Women’s HospitalBoston
DENNIS L. KASPER, MD
William Ellery Channing Professor of MedicineProfessor of Microbiology and Molecular GeneticsHarvard Medical SchoolDirector, Channing LaboratoryDepartment of MedicineBrigham and Women’s HospitalBoston
STEPHEN L. HAUSER, MD
Robert A. Fishman Distinguished Professor and Chairman, Department of NeurologyUniversity of California, San FranciscoSan Francisco
DAN L. LONGO, MD
Scientiﬁc Director, National Institute on AgingNational Institutes of HealthBethesda and Baltimore, Maryland
J. LARRY JAMESON, MD,PhD
Professor of MedicineVice-President for Medical Affairs and Lewis Landsberg DeanNorthwestern University Feinberg School of MedicineChicago
JOSEPH LOSCALZO, MD,PhD
Hersey Professor of the Theory and Practice of MedicineHarvard Medical SchoolChairman, Department of MedicinePhysician-in-Chief, Brigham and Women’s HospitalBoston
SELF-ASSESSMENT
AND BOARD REVIEW
For use with the 17th edition of HARRISON’S PRINCIPLES OF INTERNAL MEDICINE
EDITED BY
CHARLES WIENER, MD
Professor of Medicine and Physiology
Vice Chair, Department of MedicineDirector, Osler Medical Training ProgramThe Johns Hopkins University School of MedicineBaltimore
Contributing Editors
Gerald Bloomﬁeld, MD, MPH
Cynthia D. Brown, MD Joshua Schiffer, MDAdam Spivak, MD
Department of Internal Medicine
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore
New Y ork Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney T oronto
HARRISON'S
INTERNAL
MEDICINE
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or di stributed in any form or by
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
0-07-164131-9The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-149619-X.All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names
in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appearin this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate  training programs. For more
information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. TERMS OF USE This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to t he work. Use of this work
is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decom-
pile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense thework or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’ s prior consent. Y ou may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the workis strictly prohibited. Y our right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY ,
ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CANBE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSL Y DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY , EXPRESS ORIMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will beuninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, er ror or omission, regardless of
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages thatresult from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shallapply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
DOI: 10.1036/007149619X

We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,its author, or related books and websites,please click here.Professional
Want to learn more?

vCONTENTS
Preface vii
SECTION I INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL MEDICINE
Questions 1
Answers 18
SECTION II NUTRITION
Questions 47
Answers 50
SECTION III ONCOLOGY AND HEMATOLOGY
Questions 55
Answers 71
SECTION IV INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Questions 103
Answers 130
SECTION V DISORDERS OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Questions 175
Answers 202
SECTION VI DISORDERS OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Questions 237
Answers 254
SECTION VII DISORDERS OF THE URINARY AND KIDNEY TRACT
Questions 283
Answers 293
SECTION VIII DISORDERS OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
Questions 307
Answers 321
SECTION IX RHEUMATOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
Questions 345
Answers 358For more information about this title, click here
vi CONTENTS
SECTION X ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM
Questions 379
Answers 393
SECTION XI NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
Questions 421
Answers 435
SECTION XII DERMATOLOGY
Questions 457
Answers 460
References 465
Color Atlas 473
viiPREFACE
People who pursue careers in Internal Medicine are drawn to
the specialty by a love of patients, mechanisms, discovery,education, and therapeutics. We love hearing the stories toldto us by our patients, linking signs and symptoms to patho-physiology, solving the diagnostic dilemmas, and proposingstrategies to prevent and treat illness. It is not surprisinggiven these tendencies that internists prefer to continue theirlife-long learning through problem solving.
This book is offered as a companion to the remarkable
17th edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine . It is
designed for the student of medicine to reinforce the knowl-edge contained in the parent book in an active, rather thanpassive, format. This book contains over 1000 questions,most centered on a patient presentation. Answering thequestions requires understanding pathophysiology, epide-miology, differential diagnosis, clinical decision making, andtherapeutics. We have tried to make the questions and thediscussions timely and relevant to clinicians. All answer dis-cussions are referenced to the relevant chapter(s) in the par-ent book and often contain useful ﬁgures or algorithms ap-propriate to the question. We recommend this book tostudents and clinicians looking for an active method of life-long learning and as a resource for preparing for the InternalMedicine board examination.
We appreciate the conﬁdence of the editors of Harri-
son’s, 17th edition, to allow us to do this book. We thank our
families and loved ones who had to watch us pore over pageproofs to come up with original questions and answers. Allof the authors are (or were) afﬁliated with Osler MedicalTraining Program at the The Johns Hopkins School of Medi-cine. The dedicated physicians of the Osler Medical Serviceinspire us daily to constantly learn and improve. We thankthem for their constant appreciation of high standards andtheir dedication to outstanding patient care. Many of thecase presentations derive from actual patients we’ve caredfor, and we thank the patients of Johns Hopkins Hospital fortheir nobility and their willingness to participate in our clin-ical and educational missions.
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
This page intentionally left blank 
1I. INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL MEDICINE 
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
I-1.   A physician is deciding whether to use a new test to
screen for disease X in his practice. The prevalence of dis-
ease X is 5%. The sensitivity of the test is 85%, and thespeciﬁcity is 75%. In a population of 1000, how many pa-tients will have the diagnosis of disease X missed by thistest?
A. 50
B. 42C. 8D. 4
I-2.   How many patients will be erroneously told they have
diagnosis X on the basis of the results of this test?
A. 713
B. 505C. 237D. 42
I-3.   Which type of health care delivery system encourages
physicians to see more patients but to provide fewerservices?
A. Capitation
B. Fee-for-serviceC. Fixed salary compensationD. Out-of-pocket
I-4.   The curve that graphically represents the family of cut-
off points for a positive vs. negative test is a receiver oper-ating characteristic (ROC) curve. The area under thiscurve is a quantitative measure of the information con-tent of a test. The ROC axes are
A. negative predictive value vs. (1 – positive predictive
value)
B. positive predictive value vs. (1 – negative predictive
value)
C. sensitivity vs. (1 – speciﬁcity)
D. speciﬁcity vs. (1 – sensitivity)
I-5.   A patient is seen in the clinic for evaluation of chest
pain. The patient is 35 years old and has no medical ill-nesses. She reports occasional intermittent chest pain thatis unrelated to exercise but is related to eating spicy food.The physician’s pretest probability for coronary arterydisease causing these symptoms is low; however, the pa-tient is referred for an exercise treadmill test, which showsST depression after moderate exercise. Using Bayes’ theo-rem, how does one interpret these test results?
A. The pretest probability is low, and the sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of exercise treadmill testing in fe-
males are poor; therefore, the exercise treadmill
test is not helpful in clinical decision making inthis case. 
B. Regardless of the pretest probability, the abnormal
result of this exercise treadmill testing requires fur-ther evaluation. 
C. Because the pretest probability for coronary artery
disease is low, the patient should be referred for fur-ther testing to rule out this diagnosis.
D. Because the pretest probability was low in this case,
a diagnostic test with a low sensitivity and speciﬁcityis sufﬁcient to rule out the diagnosis of coronary ar-tery disease. 
E. The testing results suggest that the patient has a very
high likelihood of having coronary artery diseaseand should undergo cardiac catheterization.
I-6.   An effective way to measure the accuracy of a diag-
nostic test is a positive likelihood ratio [sensitivity/(1 –speciﬁcity)], which is also deﬁned as the ratio of theprobability of a positive test result in a patient with dis-ease to the probability of a positive test result in a patientwithout disease. What other piece of information isneeded along with a positive likelihood ratio to estimatethe possibility of a given disease in a certain patient with apositive test result?
A. Disease prevalence in the patient’s geographic region
B. Negative predictive value of the testC. Positive predictive value of the testD. Pretest probability of the disease in a patientI-5. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
2 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
I-7.   Drug X is investigated in a meta-analysis for its effect on
mortality after a myocardial infarction. It is found that mor-
tality drops from 10 to 2% when this drug is administered.What is the absolute risk reduction conferred by drug X?
A. 2%
B. 8%C. 20%D. 200%E. None of the above
I-8.   How many patients will have to be treated with drug X
to prevent one death?
A. 2
B. 8C. 12.5D. 50E. 93
I-9.   A healthy 23-year-old female is referred to your clinic af-
ter being seen in the emergency department for intermittentsevere chest pain. During her visit, she is ruled out for car-diac ischemia, with negative biomarkers for cardiac is-chemia and unremarkable electrocardiograms. An exercisesingle photon emission CT (SPECT) myocardial perfusiontest was performed, and a reversible exercise-induced perfu-sion defect was noted. The test was read as positive. The pa-tient was placed on aspirin. She is quite concerned that shecontinues to have chest pain intermittently on a daily basiswithout any consistency in regards to time or antecedent ac-tivity. She is otherwise active and feeling well. She smokessocially on weekends. She has no family history of early cor-onary disease. What would be the best next course of action?
A. Cardiac catheterization
B. CT of her coronary arteriesC. Dobutamine stress echocardiogramD. Evaluation for non-cardiac source of her chest painE. Repeat exercise SPECT test
I-10.   Which of the following statements regarding gender
health is true?
A. Alzheimer’s disease affects men and women at equal
rates.
B. Alzheimer’s disease affects men two times more
commonly than women.
C. In a recent placebo-controlled trial, postmenopausal
hormone therapy did not show improvement in dis-
ease progression in women with Alzheimer’s disease.
D. Women with Alzheimer’s disease have higher levels of
circulating estrogen than women without Alzheimer’sdisease.
I-11.   All of the following statements regarding women’s
health are true except
A. Coronary heart disease mortality rates have been
falling in men over the past 30 years, while increasingin women.B. Women have longer QT intervals on resting ECG,
predisposing them to higher rates of ventricular ar-rhythmia.
C. Women are more likely than men to have atypical
symptoms of angina such as nausea, vomiting, andupper back pain.
D. Women with myocardial infarction (MI) are more
likely to present with ventricular tachycardia, whereasmen are more likely to present with cardiogenicshock.
E. Women under the age of 50 experience twice the
mortality rate compared to men after MI.
I-12.   When ordering an evaluation of coronary artery
disease in a female patient, all of the following are trueexcept
A. Exercise stress testing has more false positives in
women than in men.
B. Exercise stress testing has more false negatives in
women than in men.
C. Women are less likely than men to undergo angio-
plasty and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
D. Women undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery
have lower 5- and 10-year survival rates than men.
E. Women undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery
have less relief of angina and less graft patency than
men.
I-13.   Which of the following statements regarding cardio-
vascular risk is true?
A. Aspirin is effective as a means of primary prevention
in women for coronary heart disease.
B. Cholesterol-lowering drugs are less effective in
women than in men for primary and secondary pre-
vention of coronary heart disease.
C. Low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and diabetes
mellitus are more important risk factors for menthan for women for coronary heart disease.
D. T otal triglyceride levels are an independent risk factor
for coronary heart disease in women but not in men.
I-14.   Which of the following alternative medicines has
shown proven beneﬁt compared to placebo in a large ran-domized clinical trial?
A. Echinacea root for respiratory infection
B. Ginkgo biloba  for improving cognition in the elderly
C. Glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate for improving per-
formance and slowing narrowing of the joint space inpatients with moderate to severe osteoarthritis
D. Saw palmetto for men with symptomatic benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
E. St.-John’s-wort for major depression of moderate
severity
I-15.   Y ou prescribe an extended-release antihypertensive
agent for your patient at a dosing interval of 24 h. TheI-11. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 3
half-life of the agent is 48 h. Three days later the patient’s
blood pressure is not controlled. At this point you should
A. add a second agent
B. double the dose of the current agentC. increase the frequency of the current dose to twice/dayD. recheck the blood pressure in 1 weekE. switch to an agent from a different class
I-16.   A 56-year-old patient arrives in your clinic with wors-
ening somnolence, per his wife. Y ou have followed himfor several years for his long-standing liver disease relatedto heavy alcohol use in the past and hepatitis C infection,as well as chronic low back pain related to trauma. He hasrecently developed ascites but has had a good response todiuretic therapy. He has no history of gastrointestinalbleeding, he denies fever, chills, abdominal pain, tremor,or any recent change in his medicines, which include fu-rosemide, 40 mg daily; spironolactone, 80 mg daily; andextended-release morphine, 30 mg twice a day. He is afe-brile with normal vital signs. His weight is down 5 kgsince initiating diuretic therapy. Physical examination isnotable for a somnolent but conversant man with mildjaundice, pinpoint pupils, palmar erythema, spider he-mangiomas on his chest, a palpable nodular liver edge atthe costal margin, and bilateral 1+ lower extremityedema. He does not have asterixis, abdominal tenderness,or an abdominal ﬂuid wave. Laboratory results comparedto 3 months previously reveal an increased INR, from 1.4to 2.1; elevated total bilirubin, from 1.8 to 3.6 mg/dL; anddecreased albumin from 3.4 to 2.9 g/L; as well as baselineelevations of his aspartate and alanine aminotransferases(54 U/L and 78 U/L, respectively). Serum NH
4 is 16.
What would be a sensible next step for this patient?
A. Decrease his morphine dose by 50% and reevaluate
him in a few days
B. Initiate antibiotic therapy
C. Initiate haloperidol therapyD. Initiate lactulose therapyE. Perform a paracentesis
I-17.   A homeless male is evaluated in the emergency depart-
ment. He has noted that after he slept outside during a par-ticularly cold night his left foot has become clumsy andfeels “dead.” On examination, the foot has hemorrhagicvesicles distributed throughout the foot distal to the ankle.The foot is cool and has no sensation to pain or tempera-ture. The right foot is hyperemic but does not have vesiclesand has normal sensation. The remainder of the physicalexamination is normal. Which of the following statementsregarding the management of this disorder is true?
A. Active foot rewarming should not be attempted.
B. During the period of rewarming, intense pain can
be anticipated.
C. Heparin has been shown to improve outcomes in
this disorder.D. Immediate amputation is indicated.E. Normal sensation is likely to return with rewarming.
I-18.    A 78-year-old female is seen in the clinic with com-
plaints of urinary incontinence for several months. Sheﬁnds that she is unable to hold her urine at random timesthroughout the day; this is not related to coughing orsneezing. The leakage is preceded by an intense need toempty the bladder. She has no pain associated with theseepisodes, though she ﬁnds them very distressing. The pa-tient is otherwise independent in the activities of dailyliving, with continued ability to cook and clean for her-self. Which of the following statements is true?
A. The abrupt onset of similar symptoms should
prompt cystoscopy.
B. First-line therapy for this condition consists of des-
mopressin.
C. Indwelling catheters are rarely indicated for this dis-
order.
D. Referral to a genitourinary surgeon is indicated for
surgical correction.
E. Urodynamic testing must be performed before the
prescription of antispasmodic medications.
I-19.    All of the following statements regarding medications
in the geriatric population are true except
A. Falling albumin levels in the elderly lead to in-
creased free (active) levels of some medications, in-
cluding warfarin.
B. Fat-soluble drugs have a shorter half-life in geriatric
patients.
C. Hepatic clearance decreases with age.D. The elderly have a decreased volume of distribution
for many medications because of a decrease in totalbody water.
E. Older patients are two to three times more likely to
have an adverse drug reaction.
I-20.    Which of the following class of medicines has been
linked to the occurrence of hip fractures in the elderly?
A. Benzodiazepines
B. OpiatesC. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitorsD. Beta blockersE. Atypical antipsychotics
I-21.    Patients taking which of the following drugs should
be advised to avoid drinking grapefruit juice?
A. Amoxicillin
B. AspirinC. AtorvastatinD. PrevacidE. Sildenaﬁl
I-22.    A recent 18-year-old immigrant from Kenya presents
to a university clinic with fever, nasal congestion, severeI-17. (Continued) I-15. (Continued)
4 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
fatigue, and a rash. The rash started with discrete lesions
at the hairline that coalesced as the rash spread caudally.There is sparing of the palms and soles. Small white spotswith a surrounding red halo are noted on examination ofthe palate. The patient is at risk for developing which ofthe following in the future?
A. Encephalitis
B. EpiglottitisC. Opportunistic infectionsD. Postherpetic neuralgiaE. Splenic rupture
I-23.   Y ou are a physician working in an urban emergency de-
partment when several patients are brought in after the re-lease of an unknown gas at the performance of a symphony.Y ou are evaluating a 52-year-old female who is not able totalk clearly because of excessive salivation and rhinorrhea, al-though she is able to tell you that she feels as if she lost hersight immediately upon exposure. At present, she also hasnausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle twitching. On physi-cal examination the patient has a blood pressure of 156/92, aheart rate of 92, a respiratory rate of 30, and a temperature of37.4°C (99.3°F). She has pinpoint pupils with profuse rhi-norrhea and salivation. She also is coughing profusely, withproduction of copious amounts of clear secretions. A lungexamination reveals wheezing on expiration in bilateral lungﬁelds. The patient has a regular rate and rhythm with nor-mal heart sounds. Bowel sounds are hyperactive, but the ab-domen is not tender. She is having diffuse fasciculations. Atthe end of your examination, the patient abruptly developstonic-clonic seizures. Which of the following agents is mostlikely to cause this patient’s symptoms?
A. Arsine
B. Cyanogen chlorideC. Nitrogen mustardD. SarinE. VX
I-24.   All the following should be used in the treatment of
this patient except
A. atropineB. decontaminationC. diazepamD. phenytoinE. 2-pralidoxime chloride
I-25.   A 24-year-old male is brought to the emergency de-
partment after taking cyanide in a suicide attempt. He isunconscious on presentation. What drug should be usedas an antidote?
A. Atropine
B. Methylene blueC. 2-PralidoximeD. Sodium nitrite aloneE. Sodium nitrite with sodium thiosulfateI-26.   A 40-year-old female is exposed to mustard gas dur-
ing a terrorist bombing of her ofﬁce building. She pre-sents to the emergency department immediately afterexposure without complaint. The physical examination isnormal. What is the next step?
A. Admit the patient for observation because symp-
toms are delayed 2 h to 2 days after exposure and
treat supportively as needed.
B. Administer 2-pralidoxime as an antidote and ob-
serve for symptoms.
C. Irrigate the patient’s eyes and apply ocular glucocor-
ticoids to prevent symptoms from developing.
D. Discharge the patient to home as she is unlikely to
develop symptoms later.
E. Discharge the patient to home but ask that she return
in 7 days for monitoring of the white blood cell count.
I-27.   A 24-year-old healthy man who has just returned from a
1-week summer camping trip to the Ozarks presents to theemergency room with fever, a severe headache, mild abdom-inal pain, and severe myalgias. He is discharged home but 1day later feels even worse and therefore returns. T emperatureis 38.4°C; heart rate is 113 beats/min; blood pressure is 120/70. Physical examination is notable for a well-developed,well-nourished, but diaphoretic and distressed man. He isalert and oriented to time and place. His lungs are clear toauscultation. He has no heart murmur. His abdomen ismildly tender with normal bowel sounds. Neurologic exam-ination is nonfocal. There is no evidence of a rash. Labora-tory evaluation is notable for a platelet count of 84,000/ µL. A
lumbar puncture is notable for 5 monocytes, no red bloodcells, normal protein levels, and normal glucose levels. Whatshould be the next step in this patient’s management?
A. Atovaquone
B. Blood cultures and observationC. DoxycyclineD. RimantadineE. Vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and ampicillin
I-28.   A 23-year-old woman with a chronic lower extremity
ulcer related to prior trauma presents with rash, hypoten-sion, and fever. She has had no recent travel or outdoorexposure and is up to date on all of her vaccinations. Shedoes not use IV drugs. On examination, the ulcer looksclean with a well-granulated base and no erythema,warmth, or pustular discharge. However, the patient doeshave diffuse erythema that is most prominent on herpalms, conjunctiva, and oral mucosa. Other than pro-found hypotension and tachycardia, the remainder of theexamination is nonfocal. Laboratory results are notablefor a creatinine of 2.8 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferaseof 250 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 328 U/L, totalbilirubin of 3.2 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 0.5 mg/dL, INRof 1.5, activated partial thromboplastin time of 1.6 × con-
trol, and platelets at 94,000/ µL. Ferritin is 1300 µg/mL.
The patient is started on broad-spectrum antibiotics afterI-22. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 5
appropriate blood cultures are drawn and is resuscitated
with IV ﬂuid and vasopressors. Her blood cultures arenegative at 72 h: at this point her ﬁngertips start todesquamate. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA)
B. LeptospirosisC. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndromeD. Streptococcal toxic shock syndromeE. Typhoid fever
I-29.   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
has designated several biologic agents as category A in theirability to be used as bioweapons. Category A agents includeagents that can be easily disseminated or transmitted, re-sult in high mortality, can cause public panic, and requirespecial action for public health preparedness. All the fol-lowing agents are considered category A except
A. Bacillus anthracis
B. Francisella tularensis
C. ricin toxin from Ricinus communis
D. smallpoxE. Yersinia pestis
I-30.   A 50-year-old alcoholic woman with well-controlled
cirrhosis eats raw oysters from the Chesapeake Bay at acookout. Twelve hours later she presents to the emer-gency department with fever, hypotension, and alteredsensorium. Her extremity examination is notable for dif-fuse erythema with areas of hemorrhagic bullae on hershins. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Escherichia coli  sepsis
B. Hemolytic uremic syndrome
C. MeningococcemiaD. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndromeE. Vibrio vulniﬁcus  infection
I-31.   Hyperthermia is deﬁned as
A. a core temperature >40.0°CB. a core temperature >41.5°CC. an uncontrolled increase in body temperature de-
spite a normal hypothalamic temperature setting
D. an elevated temperature that normalizes with anti-
pyretic therapy
E. temperature >40.0°C, rigidity, and autonomic dys-
regulation
I-32.   A patient in the intensive care unit develops a temper-
ature of 40.8°C, profoundly rigid tone, and hemody-namic shock 2 min after a succinylcholine infusion isstarted. Immediate therapy should include
A. intravenous dantrolene sodium
B. acetaminophenC. external cooling devicesD. A and CE. A, B, and CI-33.   Which of the following conditions is associated with
increased susceptibility to heat stroke in the elderly?
A. A heat wave
B. Antiparkinsonian therapyC. Bedridden statusD. Diuretic therapyE. All of the above
I-34.    A 68-year-old alcoholic arrives in the emergency de-
partment after being found in the snow on a cold winternight in Chicago. His core temperature based on rectaland esophageal probe is 27°C. Pulse is 30 beats/min andblood pressure is 75/40 mmHg. He is immobile and lackscorneal, oculocephalic, and peripheral reﬂexes. He is im-mediately intubated and placed on a cardiac monitor. Hethen converts to ventricular ﬁbrillation: a deﬁbrillationattempt at 2 J/kg is not successful. What should be thenext immediate step in management?
A. Active rewarming with forced-air heating blankets,
heated humidiﬁed oxygen, heated crystalloid infusion
B. Amiodarone infusion
C. Insertion of a transvenous pacemakerD. Passive rewarming with numerous blankets for in-
sulation
E. Repeat deﬁbrillation
I-35.    In the evaluation of malnutrition, which of the fol-
lowing proteins has the shortest half-life and thus is mostpredictive of recent nutritional status?
A. Albumin
B. FibronectinC. Retinol-binding protein complexD. PrealbuminE. Transferrin
I-36.   A 45-year-old man is stranded overnight in the cold after
an avalanche. He is airlifted to your medical center andfound to have anesthesia and a clumsy sensation in the distalextent of the ﬁngers on his left hand (see Color Atlas, FigureI-36). What is the best initial management of his hand?
A. Intravenous nitroglycerine
B. Oral nifedipineC. Rapid rewarmingD. Surgical debridementE. T opical nitroglycerine paste
I-37.    Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) was shown to de-
crease colon cancer–related mortality from 8.8/1000 per-sons to 5.9/1000 persons over a 13-year period. What isthe approximate absolute risk reduction (ARR) of this in-tervention in the studied population?
A. 50%
B. 30%
C. 3%D. 0.3%E. 0%I-28. (Continued)
6 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
I-38.   Which preventative intervention leads to the largest av-
erage increase in life expectancy for a target population?
A. A regular exercise program for a 40-year-old man
B. Getting a 35-year-old smoker to quit smokingC. Mammography in women aged 50–70D. Pap smears in women aged 18–65E. Prostate speciﬁc antigen (PSA) and digital rectal ex-
amination for a man >50 years old
I-39.   All of the following patients should receive a lipid
screening proﬁle except
A. a 16-year-old male with type 1 diabetesB. a17-year-old female teen who recently began smokingC. a 23-year-old healthy male who is starting his ﬁrst jobD. a 48-year-old woman beginning menopauseE. a 62-year-old man with no past medical history
I-40.   A 46-year-old female presents to her primary care doc-
tor complaining of a feeling of anxiety. She notes that shealways had been what she describes as a “worrier,” even ingrade school. The patient has always avoided speaking inpublic and recently is becoming anxious to the extentwhere she is having difﬁculty functioning at work and insocial situations. She has difﬁculty falling asleep at nightand ﬁnds that she is always “ﬁdgety” and has a compulsiveurge to move. The patient owns a real estate company thathas been in decline since a downturn in the local economy.She recently has been avoiding showing homes for sale. In-stead, she defers to her partners because she ﬁnds that sheis nervous to the point of being unable to speak to her cli-ents. She has two children, ages 16 and 12, who are very ac-tive in sports. She feels overwhelmed with worry over thepossibility of injury to her children and will not attendtheir sports events. Y ou suspect that the patient has a gen-eralized anxiety disorder. All of the following statementsregarding this diagnosis are true except
A. The age at onset of symptoms is usually before 20
years, although the diagnosis usually occurs muchlater in life.
B. Over 80% of these patients will have concomitant
mood disorders such as major depression, dys-thymia, or social phobia.
C. As in panic disorder, shortness of breath, tachycar-
dia, and palpitations are common.
D. Experimental work suggests that the pathophysiology
of generalized anxiety disorder involves impairedbinding of benzodiazepines at the γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) receptor.
E. The therapeutic approach to patients with general-
ized anxiety disorder should include both pharmaco-logic agents and psychotherapy, although completerelief of symptoms is rare.
I-41.   For which of the following herbal remedies is there
the best evidence for efﬁcacy in treating the symptoms ofbenign prostatic hypertrophy?A. Saint John’s wortB. GingkoC. KavaD. Saw palmettoE. No herbal therapy is effective
I-42.   Which of the following personality traits is most likely
to describe a young female with anorexia nervosa?
A. Depressive
B. BorderlineC. AnxiousD. PerfectionistE. Impulsive
I-43.   Why is it necessary to coadminister vitamin B
6 (pyri-
doxine) with isoniazid?
A. Vitamin B 6 requirements are higher in tuberculosis
patients.
B. Isoniazid causes decarboxylation of γ-carboxyl groups
in vitamin K–dependent enzymes.
C. Isoniazid interacts with pyridoxal phosphate.
D. Isoniazid causes malabsorption of vitamin B 6.
E. Isoniazid causes a conversion of homocysteine to
cystathionine.
I-44.   The prevalence of hypertension in American persons
aged >65 years old is
A. 10–35%
B. 35–60%C. 60–85%D. >85%
I-45.   Diabetes is associated with all of the following in the
elderly except
A. cerebrovascular accidentB. cognitive declineC. fall riskD. myocardial infarctionE. urinary incontinence
I-46.   Which of the following is the best indicator of progno-
sis and longevity in a geriatric patient?
A. Functional status
B. Life span of ﬁrst-degree relativesC. Marital statusD. Number of medical comorbiditiesE. Socioeconomic status
I-47.   Diagnostic criteria for delirium as a cause of a con-
fused state in a hospitalized patient include all of the fol-lowing except
A. agitation
B. altered level of consciousnessC. disorganized thinkingI-41. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 7
D. ﬂuctuating mental status
E. poor attention
I-48.   Fall risks in the elderly include all of the following
except
A. creatinine clearance <65 mL/min
B. diabetes mellitusC. fear of fallingD. history of fallsE. hypertensionF. psychotropic medications
I-49.   A stage 1 decubitus ulcer (nonblanchable erythema
of intact skin or edema and induration over a bony pres-sure point) can progress to a stage 4 decubitus ulcer(full-thickness skin loss with tissue necrosis as well asdamage to bone, muscle and tendons) over what periodof time?
A. Several hours
B. 1–2 daysC. 1–2 weeksD. 1–2 months
I-50.   A 74-year-old woman complains of leaking urine when
she coughs, laughs, or lifts her groceries. She denies poly-dipsia and polyuria. She delivered four children vaginallyand underwent total abdominal hysterectomy for ﬁbroids20 years earlier. She has mild fasting hyperglycemia that iscontrolled with diet. What is likely to be the best manage-ment for her problem?
A. Bladder retraining exercises (planned urinations every
2 h)
B. Doxazosin plus ﬁnasteride
C. MetforminD. OxybutyninE. Surgery
I-51.   A 38-year-old man with multiple sclerosis develops
acute ﬂaccid weakness in his left arm and left leg. Physi-cal examination reveals normal sensorium, normal cra-nial nerve function, 1/5 strength in his left upperextremity, 0/5 strength in his left lower extremity, im-paired proprioception in his left leg, intact propriocep-tion in his right leg, decreased pain and temperaturesensation in his right arm and leg, and normal lighttouch/pain and temperature sensation in his right leg.Where is his causative lesion most likely to be?
A. Cervical nerve roots
B. High cervical spinal cordC. MedullaD. PonsE. Right cortical hemisphere
I-52.   A 32-year-old man with a history of HIV infection
presents to the hospital with nausea, abdominal disten-tion and projectile vomiting that developed over the pre-vious 8–12 h. He denies fevers, chills, diaphoresis,melena, or diarrhea. Over the past 3 months, he has lost30 lb in the context of advanced HIV infection. He hasnever had abdominal surgery. On examination, his abdo-men is distended, with high-pitched intermittent bowelsounds and guarding but no rebound. A periumbilicalbruit is also detected. Abdominal x-ray reveals a small-bowel obstruction with a probable cut-off point in themid duodenum. What is the diagnostic test of choice fordiagnosing the cause of the underlying obstruction?
A. Abdominal CT with abdominal angiogram
B. EnteroscopyC. LaparoscopyD. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levelE. Stool acid-fast bacillus cultureF. Upper gastrointestinal (GI) series with small bowel
follow through
I-53.    A 64-year-old man with primary light chain amyloi-
dosis develops orthostatic symptoms despite maintainingadequate oral intake. He also notes early satiety, withbloating and vomiting if he eats too rapidly. T o combatthis, he has decreased the size of his meals but eats twiceas frequently during the day, with some positive effect.What is the most likely explanation for his gastrointesti-nal symptoms?
A. Diverticulosis
B. Gastric cancerC. GastroparesisD. Irritable bowel syndromeE. Small-bowel obstruction
I-54.    A 42-year-old man with a history of end-stage re-
nal disease is on hemodialysis and has been taking amedication chronically for nausea and vomiting. Overthe past week he has developed new-onset involuntarylip smacking, grimacing, and tongue protrusion. Thisside effect is most likely due to which of the followingantiemetics?
A. Erythromycin
B. MethylprednisoloneC. OndansetronD. ProchlorperazineE. Scopolamine
I-55.   Which of the following is not a common cause of per-
sistent cough lasting more than 3 months in a non-smoker?
A. Asthma
B. Gastroesophageal reﬂux diseaseC. LisinoprilD. Mycoplasma  infection
E. Postnasal dripI-47. (Continued) I-52. (Continued)
8 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
I-56.   A 64-year-old alcoholic presents to the emergency de-
partment with occasional hemoptysis, productive cough,
and low-grade fever over the past several weeks. His CTscan shows an abnormality in the right lower lobe. He re-ports several contacts with tuberculosis-infected patientswhile in prison several years ago. Sputum examinationreveals putrid-smelling thick green sputum streaked withblood. The Gram stain shows many polymorphonuclearleukocytes and a mix of gram-positive and -negative or-ganisms. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Bronchogenic carcinoma 
B. Polymicrobial lung abscessC. Pulmonary tuberculosisD. Tricuspid valve endocarditisE. Wegener’s granulomatosis
I-57.   A 74-year-old man with known endobronchial carci-
noma of his left mainstem bronchus develops massive he-moptysis (1 L of frank hemoptysis productive of brightred blood) while hospitalized. All of the following shouldbe considered in his initial management except
A. bronchial artery embolizationB. cough suppressantsC. direct bronchoscopic electrocauteryD. placing the patient in the lateral decubitus position
with his right side down
E. selective intubation of the right main stem bronchus
under bronchoscopy
I-58.   A patient with proteinuria has a renal biopsy that re-
veals segmental collapse of the glomerular capillary loopsand overlying podocyte hyperplasia. The patient mostlikely has
A. diabetes
B. HIV infectionC. multiple myelomaD. systemic lupus erythematosusE. Wegener’s granulomatosisI-59.   A 35-year-old woman comes to your clinic complain-
ing of shortness of breath. It is immediately apparent thatshe has a bluish tinge of her face, trunk, extremities, andmucus membranes. Which of the following diagnoses ismost likely?
A. Atrial septal defect
B. Myocarditis C. Raynaud’s phenomenonD. SepsisE. Vasospasm due to cold temperature
I-60.   A 43-year-old man with alcoholic liver disease com-
plains of dyspnea upon sitting up. Physical examinationis notable for chest spider angiomas and palmar ery-thema. His arterial oxygen saturations fall from 96% to88% upon transition from lying to sitting. His lungﬁelds are clear and heart sounds are crisp. Abdominalexamination is notable for a palpable nodular liver edgebut no ﬂuid wave or shifting dullness. He has 1+ lowerextremity edema. What is the most likely cause of hisdyspnea?
A. Chronic thromboembolic disease
B. Congestive heart failure C. Pulmonary arteriovenous ﬁstulaD. Portal hypertensionE. Ventricular septal defect
I-61.   A 30-year-old woman complains of lower extremity
swelling and abdominal distention. It is particularly trou-blesome after her daily shift as a toll booth operator andis at its worst during hot weather. She denies shortness ofbreath, orthopnea, dyspnea on exertion, jaundice, foamyurine, or diarrhea. Her symptoms occur independently ofher menstrual cycle. Physical examination is notable for2+ lower extremity edema, ﬂat jugular venous pulsation,no hepatojugular reﬂex, normal S
1 and S 2 with no extra
heart sounds, clear lung ﬁelds, a benign slightly distendedabdomen with no organomegaly, and normal skin. Acomplete metabolic panel is within normal limits, and aurinalysis shows no proteinuria. What is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Cirrhosis
B. Congestive heart failureC. Cyclical edemaD. Idiopathic edemaE. Gastrointestinal malabsorptionF. Nephrotic syndrome
I-62.   All of the following factors are associated with a greater
risk of ventricular arrhythmia versus anxiety/panic attackin a patient complaining of palpitations except
A. history of congestive heart failureB. history of coronary artery diseaseC. history of diabetes mellitusD. palpitations lasting >15 minE. palpitations provoked by ethanolFIGURE I-56

I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 9
I-63.   A 25-year-old healthy woman visits your ofﬁce during
the ﬁfth month of pregnancy. Her blood pressure is 142/86
mmHg. What should be your next step in management?
A. Have her return to your clinic in 2 weeks for a blood
pressure check
B. Initiate an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
C. Initiate a beta blockerD. Recheck her blood pressure in the seated position in
6 h
E. Recheck her blood pressure in the lateral recumbent
position in 6 h
I-64.   A 33-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus and hy-
pertension presents to the hospital with seizures duringweek 37 of her pregnancy. Her blood pressure is 156/92mmHg. She has 4+ proteinuria. Management should in-clude all of the following except
A. emergent deliveryB. intravenous labetalolC. intravenous magnesium sulfateD. intravenous phenytoin
I-65.   Which cardiac valvular disorder is the most likely to
cause death during pregnancy?
A. Aortic regurgitation
B. Aortic stenosisC. Mitral regurgitationD. Mitral stenosisE. Tricuspid regurgitation
I-66.   A 27-year-old woman develops left leg swelling dur-
ing week 20 of her pregnancy. Left lower extremity ultra-sonogram reveals a left iliac vein deep vein thrombosis(DVT). Proper management includes
A. bedrest
B. catheter-directed thrombolysisC. enoxaparinD. inferior vena cava ﬁlter placementE. Coumadin
I-67.   In which of the following categories should women
undergo routine screening for gestational diabetes?
A. Age >25 years
B. Body mass index >25 kg/m
2
C. Family history of diabetes mellitus in a ﬁrst-degree
relative
D. African AmericanE. All of the above
I-68.   All of the following should be components of the rou-
tine evaluation of any patient undergoing medium- orhigh-risk non-cardiac surgery except
A. 12-lead resting electrocardiogramB. chest radiographC. detailed historyD. physical examinationE. treadmill stress test
I-69.   Noninvasive cardiac imaging/stress testing should be
considered in patients with how many of the following sixproven risk factors (high-risk surgery, ischemic heart dis-ease, congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, di-abetes mellitus, and renal insufﬁciency) for perioperativecardiac events (including pulmonary edema, myocardialinfarction, and heart block)?
A. 1
B. 2C. 3D. 4E. 5
I-70.    A 72-year-old white man with New Y ork Heart Associa-
tion II ischemic cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, andchronic renal insufﬁciency (creatinine clearance = 42 mL/min) undergoes dobutamine echocardiography prior to ca-rotid endarterectomy. He is found to have 7-mm ST de-pressions in his lateral leads during the test and developsdyspnea at 70% maximal expected dosage, requiring earlycessation of the stress test. His current medicines include anangiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, a beta blocker,and aspirin. What would be your advice to the patient?
A. Cancel the carotid endarterectomy
B. Proceed to cardiac catheterizationC. Maximize medical managementD. Proceed directly to carotid endarterectomyE. Proceed directly to carotid endarterectomy and cor-
onary artery bypass surgery
I-71.   Parkinson’s disease can often be differentiated from
the atypical Parkinsonian syndromes (multiple system at-rophy, progressive supranuclear palsy) by the presence ofwhich of the following?
A. Axial stiffness 
B. Pill-rolling tremorC. Shufﬂing gaitD. Stooped posture E. Turning en bloc
I-72.   A wide-based gait with irregular lurching and erratic
foot placement but no subjective dizziness characterizeswhich type of gait ataxia?
A. Cerebellar dysfunction
B. Frontal gait abnormalityC. Inner ear dysfunctionD. Parkinsonian syndromesE. Sensory ataxia
I-73.   A patient with a narrow-based gait instability com-
plains that he needs to look at his feet while he walks toprevent falling. He feels wobbly standing with his eyesI-68. (Continued)
10 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
closed and notes frequent falls. On examination, he has
no difﬁculty initiating gait, his stride is regular, strength isnormal, and there is no tremor. Review of routine bloodwork drawn 3 months prior reveals a hematocrit of 29%with an elevated mean corpuscular volume. Which of thefollowing is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
B. Cerebellar tumorC. Cerebrovascular diseaseD. Parkinson’s diseaseE. Pernicious anemia
I-74.   Which of the following is an effective method to eval-
uate for cortical sensory deﬁcits?
A. Graphesthesia (the capacity to recognize letters drawn
by the examiner on the patient’s hand)
B. Stereognosis (the ability to recognize common ob-
jects, such as coins, by palpation)
C. T ouch localization
D. Two-point discrimination testingE. All of the above
I-75.   A 23-year-old female patient complains of visual blur-
riness. On examination, her pupils are equally round.Shining a ﬂashlight into her right eye causes equal, strongconstriction in both of her eyes. When the light is ﬂashedinto her left eye, both pupils dilate slightly though not totheir previous size prior to light confrontation. Where isthere most likely to be anatomic damage?
A. Left cornea
B. Left optic nerve or retinaC. Optic chiasmD. Right corneaE. Right optic nerve or retina
I-76.   A patient complains of blurred vision in both eyes
particularly in the periphery with the right being worsethan the left. Visual ﬁeld examination with ﬁnger con-frontation reveals a decreased vision in the left peripheryin the left eye and right periphery in the right eye. Whereis there most likely to be a lesion?
A. Bilateral optic nerves
B. Left lateral geniculate bodyC. Left occipital cortexD. Post-chiasmic optic tractE. Suprasellar space
I-77.   Which of the following methods is most effective for
the diagnosis of corneal abrasions?
A. Fluorescein and cobalt-blue light examination 
B. Intraocular pressure measurementC. Lid eversion for foreign body examinationD. Oculoplegia and dilationE. Viral culture of the corneaI-78.   Which of the following criteria best differentiates epi-
scleritis from conjunctivitis?
A. Concurrent connective tissue disease such as lupus
B. Lack of dischargeC. More diffuse ocular involvement D. Reduced eye motilityE. Severe pain
I-79.   Which diagnosis can be easily confused with adenovi-
ral conjunctivitis and is a major cause of blindness in theUnited States?
A. Endophthalmitis
B. Herpes simplex virus keratitisC. Angle-closure glaucomaD. UveitisE. Trachoma
I-80.   A 34-year-old male patient is referred to your clinic
after a new diagnosis of anterior uveitis. All of the follow-ing diseases should be screened for by history and physi-cal and/or laboratory examination because they maycause anterior uveitis except
A. ankylosing spondylitis B. Lyme diseaseC. sarcoidosis D. syphilisE. toxoplasmosis
I-81.   A 22-year-old female is referred to your clinic after
being started on glucocorticoids for a new diagnosis ofleft optic neuritis seen on examination with disc pallor,and it is conﬁrmed with quantitative visual ﬁeld map-ping. What further evaluation is indicated?
A. Antinuclear antibodies
B. Brain MRIC. Erythrocyte sedimentation rateD. No further evaluation unless symptoms recurE. T emporal artery biopsy
I-82.   A 69-year-old male dialysis patient with poorly con-
trolled diabetes, heart failure and chronic indwellingcatheters presents with fever and loss of vision in the lefteye developing over the past 6 h. Vital signs are notablefor a temperature of 101.3°F, heart rate of 105/min, andblood pressure of 125/85. Which test is most likely to con-ﬁrm the diagnosis?
A. Blood cultures
B. Blood smearC. Brain MRID. Rheumatic panelE. Rapid plasma reagin
I-83.   Exposure to which of the following types of radiation
would result in thermal injury and burns but would notcause damage to internal organs because the particle sizeis too large to cause internal penetration?I-73. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 11
A. Alpha radiation
B. Beta radiation C. Gamma radiationD. Neutron particlesE. X-rays
I-84.   A “dirty” bomb is detonated in downtown Boston.
The bomb was composed of cesium-137 with trinitro-toluene. In the immediate aftermath, an estimated 30people were killed due to the power of the blast. Thefallout area was about 0.5 mile, with radiation exposureof ~1.8 gray (Gy). An estimated 5000 people have beenpotentially exposed to beta and gamma radiation. Mostof these individuals show no sign of any injury, butabout 60 people have evidence of thermal injury. Whatis the most appropriate approach to treating the injuredvictims?
A. All individuals who have been exposed should be
treated with potassium iodide.
B. All individuals who have been exposed should be
treated with Prussian blue.
C. All individuals should be decontaminated prior to
transportation to the nearest medical center for
emergency care to prevent exposure of health careworkers.
D. Severely injured individuals should be transported
to the hospital for emergency care after removingthe victims’ clothes, as the risk of exposure to healthcare workers is low.
E. With this degree of radiation exposure, no further
testing and treatment are needed.
I-85.   A 54-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with se-
vere nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. These symptoms be-gan 36 h ago. He brieﬂy improved for a few hoursyesterday, but today has progressively worsened. He stateshe is concerned about possible poisoning because of hisrole in espionage and counterterrorism for the U.S. gov-ernment. He met with an informant 2 days previously at ahotel bar, where he drank three cups of coffee but did noteat. He does state that he left the table to place a phone callduring the meeting and is concerned that his coffee mayhave been contaminated. He otherwise is quite healthyand takes no medications. On physical examination, heappears ill. The vital signs are: blood pressure 98/60mmHg, heart rate 112 beats/min, respiratory rate 24breaths/min, Sa
O2 94%, and temperature 37.4°C. Head,
ears, eyes, nose, and throat examination shows pale mu-cous membranes. Cardiovascular examination is tachy-cardic, but regular. His lungs are clear. The abdomen isslightly distended with hyperactive bowel sounds. There isno tenderness or rebound. Extremities show no edema,but a few scattered petechiae are present. Neurologic ex-amination is normal. A complete blood count is per-formed. The results are: white blood cell (WBC) count150/µ L, red blood cell count 1.5/ µL, hemoglobin 4.5 g/dL,hematocrit 15%, platelet count 11,000/ µL. The differential
on the WBC count is 98% PMNs, 2% monocytes, and 0%lymphocytes. A blood sample is held for HLA testing. Aurine sample is positive for the presence of radioactive iso-topes, which are determined to be polonium-210, a strongemitter of alpha radiation. The mode of exposure is pre-sumed to be ingestion. What is the best approach to thetreatment of this patient?
A. Bone marrow transplantation
B. Gastric lavageC. Potassium iodideD. Supportive care onlyE. Supportive care and dimercaprol
I-86.   Several victims are brought to the emergency room after
a terrorist attack in the train station. An explosive was deto-nated that dispersed an unknown substance throughout thestation, but several people reported a smell like that ofhorseradish or burned garlic. Prior to transport to theemergency room, exposed individuals had their clothing re-moved and underwent showering and decontamination.On initial presentation, there was no apparent injury excepteye irritation. Over the next few hours, most of those ex-posed complain of nasal congestion, sinus pain, and burn-ing in the nares. Beginning about 2 h after exposure, manyof the exposed individuals began to notice diffuse redness ofthe skin, particularly in the neck, axillae, antecubital fossae,and external genitalia. In addition, a few people also devel-oped blistering of the skin. Hoarseness, cough, and dyspneaare noted as well. What is the most likely chemical agentthat was released in the terrorist attack?
A. Chlorine
B. CyanideC. Mustard gasD. Phosgene oximeE. Soman
I-87.    An unknown chemical agent was released in a terrorist
attack in the food court of a shopping mall. Several victimswho were close to the site of the release of the gas diedprior to arrival of the emergency medical teams. Upon ar-rival, the survivors were complaining of difﬁculty with vi-sion and stated that they felt the world was “going black.”The victims were also noted to be drooling and have in-creased nasal secretions. A few individuals were dyspneicwith wheezing. The most severely affected victims fell un-conscious and soon thereafter developed seizures. Whatmedication(s) should be administered immediately to thesurvivors?
A. Atropine, 6 mg IM
B. 2-Pralidoxime chloride, 1800 mg IMC. Diazepam, 5 mg IVD. A and BE. B and CF. All of the aboveI-85. (Continued) I-83. (Continued)
12 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
I-88.   A 7-month-old child is brought to clinic by his par-
ents. He was the product of a healthy pregnancy, and
there were no perinatal complications. The parents areconcerned that there is something wrong; he is very hy-peractive and is noted to have a ‘mousy’ odor. On exami-nation the child is found to have mild microcephaly,hypopigmentation and eczema. Laboratory studies aresent and a diagnosis is made. How could this clinical sce-nario have been prevented?
A. Screening at 6 months of age for urine ketones
B. Screening at birth for phenylalanine in bloodC. Screening at birth for chromosomal abnormalitiesD. Genetic screening of parents prior to deliveryE. Cord blood sampling at 2 months’ pregnancy for
glutamine synthase
I-89.   A 35-year-old woman with a history of degenerative
joint disease comes to clinic complaining of dark urineover the past several weeks. She has had arthritis in herhips, knees, and shoulders for about 2 years. On examina-tion, she is noted to have gray-brown pigmentation of thehelices of both ears. Which of the following disorders ismost likely?
A. Alkaptonuria
B. HawkinsinuriaC. HomocystinuriaD. Hyperprolinemia type IE. Tryptophanuria
I-90.    A 22-year-old man presents to a local emergency room
with severe muscle cramps and exercise intolerance. Hissymptoms have been worsening over a period of months.He has noticed that his urine is frequently dark. Examina-tion reveals tenderness over all major muscle groups. Acreatine phosphokinase (CK) is markedly elevated. He re-ports a normal childhood but since age 18 has noticedworsening exercise intolerance. He no longer plays basket-ball and recently noticed leg fatigue at two ﬂights of stairs.After intense exercise, he occasionally has red-coloredurine. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Glucose-6-phosphatase deﬁciency
B. Lactate dehydrogenase deﬁciencyC. McArdle disease (type V glycogen storage disease)D. Pyruvate kinase deﬁciencyE. von Gierke’s disease (type I glycogen storage disease)
I-91.   An enzymatic assay of muscle tissue is sent and a diag-
nosis is made. Which of the following represents a majorsource of morbidity in this disease which should be ex-plained thoroughly to the patient?
A. Fulminant liver failure
B. Myocarditis and subsequent heart failureC. Progressive proximal muscle weaknessD. Rhabdomyolysis leading to renal failure E. This is a benign disorder without major clinical risksI-92.   A 21-year-old woman comes to clinic to establish new
primary care. She has a history of type III glycogen storagedisease (debranching deﬁciency), for which she takes ahigh-protein, high-carbohydrate diet. She has a normalphysical examination except for short stature, mild weak-ness, and a slightly enlarged liver. She works as an adminis-trative assistant and is planning to be married in the next 6months. She is concerned about her long-term prognosisand the chances of the disease developing in a child. All ofthe following statements about her prognosis are true except
A. Cardiomyopathy is a possible complication.B. Chronic liver disease is a possible complication.C. Dementia is a possible complication.D. Her child will not have the disease unless her ﬁancé
is a carrier.
E. Prenatal testing is available for the disease.
I-93.   A 36-year-old man comes to your ofﬁce asking for ge-
netic testing for Alzheimer’s disease. He has no cognitivecomplaints but notes that all four of his grandparents havehad Alzheimer’s and his father has mild cognitive impair-ment at the age of 62. His Mini-Mental Status Examinationis 29/30, losing one point on the serial-7’s examination. Herequests testing for the apolipoprotein E allele ( ε4). This
request is an example of which of the following?
A. Early-onset dementia
B. Genetic discriminationC. Predisposition testingD. Presymptomatic testing
I-94.   A recently married couple comes to see you in clinic for
prenatal counseling. They are both in their mid-thirtiesand have read extensively on the internet about pregnancyand increasing maternal age. They want to know the risk ofmiscarriage as well as the risk of having a child with Downsyndrome. Which of the following is true regarding chro-mosome disorders and increasing maternal age?
A. About half of trisomy conceptions will survive to
term.
B. In women under the age of 25, trisomy occurs in
<1% of all pregnancies.
C. Lower socioeconomic status is a recognized risk fac-
tor in trisomic conceptions.
D. The risk of Down syndrome increases 1% per year
of maternal age.
E. Women over the age of 42 have a 33% chance of a
trisomic conception.
I-95.   In what percentage of pregnancies do chromosomal
disorders occur?A. 0.01%
B. 0.1–0.5%C. 1–2%D. 2–5%E. 10–25%
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 13
I-96.   All the following disorders can cause ambiguous sex-
ual differentiation except
A. 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency
B. androgen insensitivity syndromeC. Klinefelter syndromeD. mixed gonadal dysgenesisE. testicular dysgenesis
I-97.   An 18-year-old female is evaluated in an outpatient
clinic for a complaint of amenorrhea. She reports that shefeels as if she never developed normally compared withother girls her age. She has never had a menstrual periodand complains that she has had only minimal breastgrowth. Past medical history is signiﬁcant for a diagnosisof borderline hypertension. In childhood the patient fre-quently had otitis media and varicella infections. She re-ceived the standard vaccinations. She recently graduatedfrom high school and has no learning difﬁculties. She ison no medications. On physical examination, the patientis of short stature with a height of 56 in. Blood pressure is142/88. The posterior hairline is low. The nipples appearwidely spaced, with only breast buds present. The patienthas minimal escutcheon consistent with Tanner stage 2development. Her external genitalia appear normal. Bi-manual vaginal examination reveals an anteverted, ante-exed uterus. The ovaries are not palpable. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Hypothyroidism
B. HyperthyroidismC. MalnutritionD. T esticular feminizationE. Turner syndrome (gonadal dysgenesis)
I-98.   A 30-year-old male is seen for a physical examination
when obtaining life insurance. The last time he saw a phy-sician was 15 years ago. He has no complaints. Past medi-cal history is notable for scoliosis that was surgicallycorrected when the patient was a teenager and a recentshoulder dislocation. He takes no medications and doesnot smoke, drink, or use illicit drugs. Family history isnotable for a father and a brother with colon cancer atages 45 and 50 years, respectively. Physical examination isnotable for normal vital signs, a tall habitus with hyper-mobile joints, normal skin, and ectopia lentis. Rectal ex-amination is normal, and stool is guaiac-negative. Theremainder of the examination is normal. Appropriaterecommendations for follow-up should include which ofthe following annual studies?
A. Colonoscopy
B. EchocardiographyC. Fecal occult blood testingD. Serum periodic acid–Schiff (PSA) measurementE. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
I-99.   All the following diseases are caused by errors in DNA
repair exceptA. ataxia-telangiectasia (AT)B. Fanconi’s anemia (FA)C. fragile X (FX) syndromeD. hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)E. xeroderma pigmentosum (XP)
I-100.   A 45-year-old male is evaluated for weakness and a
progressive change in mental status. After extensive eval-uation, he is diagnosed with a mitochondrial disorder. Allof the following statements about mitochondrial disor-ders are true except
A. The mitochondrial genome does not recombine.B. Inheritance is maternal.C. The proportion of wild-type and mutant mitochon-
dria in different tissues is identical.
D. Cardiomyopathy is a feature of many mitochondrial
disorders.
E. Acquired somatic mitochondrial mutations may
play a role in age-related degenerative disorders.
I-101.   Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare disorder that is
characterized by diminished fetal activity, obesity, mentalretardation, and short stature. A deletion on the paternalcopy of chromosome 15 is the cause. A deletion on thesame site on chromosome 15, but on the maternal copy, re-sults in a different syndrome: Angelman’s syndrome. Thissyndrome is characterized by mental retardation, seizures,ataxia, and hypotonia. What is the name of the geneticmechanism that results in this phenomenon?
A. Genetic anticipation
B. Genetic imprintingC. LyonizationD. Somatic mosaicismE. Uniparental disomy
I-102.   All the following are inherited disorders of connec-
tive tissue except
A. Alport syndromeB. Ehlers-Danlos syndromeC. Marfan syndromeD. McArdle’s diseaseE. osteogenesis imperfecta
I-103.   A 30-year-old male comes to your ofﬁce for genetic
counseling. His brother died at age 13 years with Tay-Sachs disease. His sister is unaffected. The patient and hiswife wish to have children. Which of the following state-ments concerning Tay Sachs disease is true?
A. It is seen most commonly in Scandinavian populations.
B. It is caused by mutations in the galactosidase gene.C. Most patients die in the third or fourth decade of life.D. Death occurs as a result of progressive neurologic
decline.
E. Splenomegaly is common in these patients.I-99. (Continued)
14 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
I-104.   All of the following statements about Gaucher dis-
ease are true except
A. Bone pain is common.
B. Disease frequency is highest in Ashkenazi Jews.C. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.D. Splenomegaly is rare.E. The disease is caused by mutations in the gene for
acid β-glucosidase.
I-105.   The following pedigree is an example of what pat-
tern of inheritance?
A. X-linked recessive inheritance
B. X-linked dominant inheritanceC. Autosomal recessive inheritanceD. Autosomal dominant inheritanceE. Cannot be determined by the limited information
provided in this pedigree
I-106.   Diseases that are inherited in a multifactorial genetic
fashion (i.e., not autosomal dominant, autosomal reces-sive, or X-linked) and are seen more frequently in personsbearing certain histocompatibility antigens include
A. gluten-sensitive enteropathy 
B. neuroﬁbromatosisC. adult polycystic kidney diseaseD. Wilson’s diseaseE. cystic ﬁbrosis
I-107.   A 32-year-old man seeks evaluation for ongoing fevers
of uncertain cause. He ﬁrst noted a feeling of malaise about3 months ago, and for the past 6 weeks, he has been experi-encing daily fevers to as high as 39.4°C (103°F). He awak-ens with night sweats once weekly and has lost 4.5 kg. Hecomplains of nonspeciﬁc myalgias and arthralgias. He hasno rashes and reports no ill contacts. He has seen his pri-mary care physician on three separate occasions duringthis time and has had documented temperatures of 38.7°C(101.7°F) while in the physician’s ofﬁce. Multiple labora-tory studies have been performed that have shown nonspe-ciﬁc ﬁndings only. A complete blood count showed a whiteblood cell count of 15,700/ µL with 80% polymorphonu-clear cells, 15% lymphocytes, 3% eosinophils, and 2%monocytes. The peripheral smear is normal. The hemato-crit is 34.7%. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) iselevated at 57 mm/h. Liver and kidney function are nor-mal. HIV , Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus(CMV) testing are negative. Routine blood cultures forbacteria, chest radiograph, and puriﬁed protein derivative(PPD) testing are negative. In large groups of patients sim-ilar to this one with fever of unknown origin, which of thefollowing categories comprises the largest group of diag-noses if one is able to be determined?
A. Drug or other ingestion
B. Hereditary periodic fever syndromes, such as famil-
ial Mediterranean fever
C. InfectionD. NeoplasmE. Noninfectious inﬂammatory disease
I-108.   Chronic hypoxia causes biochemical changes whereby
oxygen delivery to tissues is not impaired. In comparisonto someone living at sea level, which of the followingchanges would be expected in a healthy person acclimatedto living at high altitude?
A. Basal temperature <37°C
B. Serum pH >7.45C. Increased red blood cell levels of 2,3-diphospho-
glycerate
D. Hemoglobin concentration <10 mg/dLE. Arterial PC
O2 <30 mmHg 
I-109.   Independent of insurance status, income, age, and
comorbid conditions, African-American patients are lesslikely to receive equivalent levels of care when comparedto white patients for the following scenarios:
A. Prescription of analgesic for pain control
B. Referral to renal transplantationC. Surgical treatment for lung cancerD. Utilization of cardiac diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures
E. All of the above
I-110.   Which of the following would be present in an indi-
vidual who has lost nondeclarative memory?
A. Inability to recall a spouse’s birthday
B. Inability to recall how to tie one’s shoeC. Inability to recognize a photo that was taken at one’s
wedding
D. Inability to recognize a watch as an instrument for
keeping time
E. Inability to remember the events of one’s high
school graduation
I-111.   A 24-year-old woman presents for a routine checkup
and complains only of small masses in her groin. She statesthat they have been present for at least 3 years. On physicalFIGURE I-105Solid figureOpen figure Affected individualUnaffected individualsI-107. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 15
examination, she is noted to have several palpable 1-cm in-
guinal lymph nodes that are mobile, nontender, and dis-crete. There is no other lymphadenopathy on examination.What should be the next step in management?
A. Bone marrow biopsy
B. CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvisC. Excisional biopsyD. Fine-needle aspiration for culture and cytopathologyE. Pelvic ultrasoundF. Reassurance
I-112.   Which of the following ﬁndings associated with lym-
phadenopathy is usually suggestive of metastatic cancerrather than a benign etiology?
A. Hard, matted texture of involved nodes
B. SplenomegalyC. Supraclavicular lymphadenopathy D. T ender adenopathy of the anterior cervical chainE. A and BF. A and CG. A and D
I-113.   All of the following diseases are associated with mas-
sive splenomegaly (spleen extends 8 cm below the costalmargin or weighs >1000 g) except
A. autoimmune hemolytic anemiaB. chronic lymphocytic leukemiaC. cirrhosis with portal hypertensionD. myeloﬁbrosis with myeloid metaplasiaE. none of the above
I-114.   The presence of Howell-Jolly bodies, Heinz bodies,
basophilic stippling, and nucleated red blood cells in apatient with hairy cell leukemia prior to any treatment in-tervention implies which of the following?
A. Diffuse splenic inﬁltration by tumor
B. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)C. Hemolytic anemiaD. PancytopeniaE. Transformation to acute leukemia
I-115.   Which of the following is true regarding infection
risk after elective splenectomy?
A. Patients are at no increased risk of viral infection af-
ter splenectomy.
B. Patients should be vaccinated 2 weeks after splenectomy.
C. Splenectomy patients over the age of 50 are at great-
est risk for postsplenectomy sepsis.
D. Staphylococcus aureus  is the most commonly impli-
cated organism in postsplenectomy sepsis.
E. The risk of infection after splenectomy increases
with time.
I-116.   A 64-year-old man comes to your ofﬁce complaining
of erectile dysfunction. He is not able to generate an erec-tion. His past medical history is signiﬁcant for coronaryartery bypass grafting many years ago, status post-carotidendarterectomy, and a mildly reduced left ventricular ejec-tion fraction. His medications include aspirin, carvedilol,simvastatin, lisinopril and furosemide. He does not takenitrates. On physical examination, you note normal-sizedtestes and a normal prostate. There are no ﬁbrotic changesalong the penile corpora. His libido is intact. What is themost likely cause of this patient’s erectile dysfunction?
A. Disturbance of blood ﬂow
B. Low testosteroneC. Medication relatedD. Psychogenic
I-117.   Y ou perform a nocturnal tumescence study on the
patient in the preceding scenario. He does not have anyerections during rapid-eye-movement sleep. Which treat-ment modality do you offer at this time?
A. Couple sex therapy
B. Implantation of a penile prosthesisC. Intraurethral alprostadilD. Vardenaﬁl
I-118.   The wife of the patient in the preceding scenario also
reports to you that she has experienced a low sexual de-sire lately. She is not distressed by this and the couple re-ports no conﬂict as a result of her low desire. She is 61years old and also has a history of a coronary artery by-pass graft remotely. She experienced menopause at theage of 53. Her medications include an aspirin, meto-prolol, simvastatin, verapamil, and a multivitamin. Sheasks whether an oral agent will assist with her sexual de-sire. What is the best answer for this patient?
A. Phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitors have
been shown to improve sexual function in pre-
menopausal women
B. PDE-5 inhibitors have been shown to improve sex-
ual function in postmenopausal women
C. PDE-5 inhibitors have no role in the treatment of fe-
male sexual dysfunction 
D. PDE-5 inhibitors treat orgasmic disorder but not
sexual arousal disorder
I-119.   A 54-year-old male patient of yours presents to your
clinic complaining of unexplained weight loss. On reviewof his chart, you do notice that he has lost 8% of his totalbody weight in the past year. He has well-treated hyper-tension for which he takes a thiazide diuretic. Other thanrecently being widowed, he has no pertinent social his-tory. He is a lifelong nonsmoker and worked as a hospitaladministrator. An extensive review of systems is unreveal-ing. Y our physical examination reveals no masses or otherpathology. A brief psychiatric examination shows nosigns of depression. Y ou perform initial testing with acomplete blood count; electrolytes, renal function, liverI-111. (Continued) I-116. (Continued)
16 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS
function, urinalysis, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and a
chest x-ray, which are unrevealing. He is up to date on hisroutine cancer screening. What is the next step in theworkup of this patient?
A. Chest CT scan
B. Close follow-upC. Positron emission tomography (PET) scanD. T otal-body CT scanE. Upper endoscopy
I-120.   Y ou are conducting research on a novel nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drug (NSAID). T o ascertain the safetyproﬁle of the drug you recruit 100 volunteers who lackthe ability to produce IgE. All subjects receive the drug. Aminority of participants experience an anaphylactic reac-tion within minutes of ingesting the drug. IgE levels areundetectable in all 100 subjects. What is the most likelyexplanation for this phenomenon?
A. The drug itself directly triggered the immune system
in a minority of patients.
B. The IgE receptor in the patients with anaphylaxis is
constitutively activated.
C. The patients who had anaphylaxis have received this
drug before.
D. The patients who had anaphylaxis overexpress
CD8+ T cells.
I-121.   Anthrax spores can remain dormant in the respira-
tory tract for how long?A. 1 week
B. 2 weeksC. 3 weeksD. 6 weeksE. 12 weeks
I-122.   Twenty recent attendees at a National Football League
game arrive at the emergency department complaining ofshortness of breath, fever, and malaise. Chest roentgeno-grams show mediastinal widening on several of these pa-tients, prompting a concern for inhalational anthrax as aresult of a bioterror attack. Antibiotics are initiated and theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention is notiﬁed. Whatform of isolation should be instituted for these patients?
A. Airborne
B. ContactC. DropletD. None
I-123.   Typical Variola major  (smallpox) infection can be dis-
tinguished from Varicella  (chicken pox) infection based on
which of the following clinical characteristics?
A. Lesions at different stages of development at any
location
B. Lesions in the same stage of development at any locationC. Maculopapular rash that begins on the face and trunk
and spreads to the extremities (centrifugal spread)
D. Maculopapular rash that begins on the face and ex-
tremities and spreads to the trunk (centripetal spread)
E. B and C
F. B and D
I-124.   Y ou are working in an urban-based intensive care unit
and two cases of severe pneumonia are admitted. Fran-
cisella tularensis  is cultured from both patients’ sputum
samples. Neither patient recalls contact with wild or do-mesticated animals in the past 2 weeks. Y ou should do all ofthe following except
A. Alert the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) authorities about the potential for a bio-terrorist attack.
B. Alert the microbiology laboratory director.C. Institute droplet precaution for the involved patients.D. Treat with broad-spectrum antibiotics.
I-125.   All of the following are well-documented physical ef-
fects of smoking marijuana except
A. decreased sperm countB. chronic bronchial irritation C. delayed gastric emptyingD. exercise-induced angina E. impaired single-breath carbon monoxide diffusion
capacity (D
LCO)
I-126.   A young man is brought to the emergency department
by his parents. For the past 12 h he has barricaded himselfin his room out of fear of being taken away by “the guys inblack.” He fears he is losing control and fears that he is go-ing to die. His parents found him trembling and sweatingin his room with various pills and plant leaves in his pos-session. He feels like he is choking and that he is about todie at any minute. On examination, his pupils are dilatedand he has a heart rate of 143 beats/min. What substance ismost likely to have caused these symptoms?
A. Heroin
B. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)C. MarijuanaD. Methamphetamine
I-127.   A 37-year-old woman arrives at the emergency depart-
ment after experiencing a transient state of altered mentalstatus on route to the United States as an immigrant fromNigeria. From the reports of the other passengers and ﬂightattendants on the plane, she was normally interactivethroughout most of the ﬂight but was difﬁcult to arousefrom sleep upon landing. Upon trying to exit the plane, shefell over and became disarticulate. Her mental status imme-diately improved when she received naloxone, thiamine,and IV glucose via an emergency response team. Upon ar-rival at the emergency department 1 h later, she appearsI-119. (Continued) I-123. (Continued)
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — QUESTIONS 17
anxious but is alert, oriented, and appropriate. T emperature
is 36.8°C, blood pressure is 162/84 mmHg, heart rate is 108beats/min, respiratory rate is 22 breaths/min, and oxygensaturation is 99% on room air. Her pupils are equal and re-active. Cranial nerves are intact. Her oropharynx is slightlydry. There is no lymphadenopathy. Lungs are clear. She hasa regular heart beat with normal S
1, S2, and no extra heart
sounds. Her abdomen has normal bowel sounds with slightepigastric tenderness. Her skin is normal without any trackmarks or rash. A complete metabolic panel and completeblood count are normal. A urine toxicology screen revealsheroin metabolites. Further evaluation should include:
A. arterial blood gas
B. blood culturesC. cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) analysisD. echocardiogramE. oriﬁce examination
I-128.   Which of the following is a distinguishing feature of
amphetamine overdose versus other causes of sympatheticoverstimulation due to drug overdose or withdrawal?
A. Hallucination
B. Hot, dry, ﬂushed skin and urinary retentionC. History of benzodiazepine abuseD. Markedly increased blood pressure, heart rate, and
end-organ damage in the absence of hallucination
E. Nystagmus
I-129.   Which of the following ﬁndings suggests an opiate
overdose?
A. Anion gap metabolic acidosis with a normal lactate
B. Hypotension and bradycardia in an alert patientC. MydriasisD. Profuse sweating and droolingE. Therapeutic response to naloxone
I-130.   A patient with metabolic acidosis, reduced anion
gap, and increased osmolal gap is most likely to havewhich of the following toxic ingestions?
A. Lithium
B. MethanolC. OxycodoneD. Propylene glycolE. SalicylateI-131.   Which of the following is true regarding drug effects
after an overdose in comparison to a reference dose?
A. Drug effects begin earlier, peak earlier, and last longer
B. Drug effects begin earlier, peak later, and last longerC. Drug effects begin earlier, peak later, and last shorterD. Drug effects begin later, peak earlier, and last shorterE. Drug effects begin later, peak later, and last longer
I-132.   A 28-year-old man with bipolar disorder, who is on
lithium, is found in his room 2 days after not showing upto work. He is arousable but dysarthric and has a mark-edly abnormal gait when trying to walk. Upon arrival atthe emergency department, he has a grand mal seizure.The seizure is not sustained but recurs an hour after 6mg lorazepam is infused IV . In the postictal stage, he isnot arousable to sternal rub and lacks a gag reﬂex. His se-rum sodium returns at 158 meq/L. In reference to hisseizures, all of the following are next steps in his manage-ment except
A. barbituratesB. benzodiazepinesC. endotracheal intubationD. free water replacementE. phenytoin
I-133.   Which of the following statements regarding gastric
decontamination for toxin ingestion is true?
A. Activated charcoal’s most common side effect is as-
piration.
B. Gastric lavage via nasogastric tube is preferred over
the use of activated charcoal in situations where
therapeutic endoscopy may also be warranted.
C. Syrup of ipecac has no role in the hospital setting.D. There are insufﬁcient data to support or exclude a
beneﬁt when gastric decontamination is used morethan 1 h after a toxic ingestion.
E. All of the above are true.
I-134.   What is the main contributor to the resting energy
expenditure of an individual?
A. Adipose tissue
B. Exercise levelC. Lean body massD. Resting heart rateE. None of the aboveI-127. (Continued)
18I. INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL MEDICINE
ANSWERS
I-1. and I-2. The answers are C and C.   (Chap. 3)   In evaluating the usefulness of a test, it is
imperative to understand the clinical implications of the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of that
test. By obtaining information about the prevalence of the disease in the population—thespeciﬁcity and sensitivity—one can generate a two-by-two table, as shown below. This ta-ble is used to generate the total number of patients in each group of the population:
The sensitivity of the test is TP/(TP + FN). The speciﬁcity is TN/(TN + FP). In this case
the table is ﬁlled in as follows:
I-3. The answer is A.   (Chap. 3)   A capitation system provides physicians with a ﬁxed pay-
ment per patient per year. This has the potential to encourage physicians to take on morepatients but to provide patients with fewer services because the physician is liable forexpenses. A ﬁxed salary system encourages physicians to take on fewer patients. A fee-for-service system encourages physicians to provide more services. Out-of-pocket services notcovered by insurers are available only to patients with adequate means to receive the service.
I-4. The answer is C.   (Chap. 3)   A receiver operating characteristic curve plots sensitivity on
they-axis and (1 – speciﬁcity) on the x-axis. Each point on the curve represents a cutoff
point of sensitivity and 1 – speciﬁcity. The area under the curve can be used as a quantita-tive measure of the information content of a test. Values range from 0.5 (a 45° line) repre-senting no diagnostic information to 1.0 for a perfect test. See Figure I-4.
I-5. The answer is A.   (Chap. 3)   Bayes’ theorem is used in an attempt to quantify uncer-
tainty by employing an equation that combines pretest probability with the testing char-acteristics of speciﬁcity and sensitivity. The pretest probability quantitatively describesthe clinician’s certainty of a diagnosis after doing a history and physical examination. Theequation is Disease Status
T est Result Present Absent 
Positive True-positive False-positive
Negative False-negative True-negative
T otal number of patients with disease T otal number of patients without disease
Disease Status
T est Result Present Absent 
Positive 42 237
Negative 8 713
T otal number of patients with disease 
= 50T otal number of patients without disease 
= 950
Posttest probabilityPretest probability test sensitivity ×
Pretest probability test sensitivity + ×
1 disease prevalence–() test false-positive rate×--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- =
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 19
In this manner, the uncertainty one faces in clinical decision making is quantiﬁed. By in-
serting numbers into the equation, one can see that a low pretest probability combinedwith a poorly sensitive and speciﬁc test will yield a low posttest probability. However, thesame test result, when combined with a high pretest probability, will yield a high posttestprobability. There have been criticisms of this theorem. Unfortunately, few tests haveonly two outcomes: positive and negative. This theorem does not take into account theuseful information that is gained from nonbinary test results. Further, it is cumbersometo calculate the posttest probability for each individual circumstance and patient. Perhapsthe most useful lesson from Bayes’ theorem is to take into account pretest probabilitywhen ordering tests or interpreting test results. T o be clinically useful, a clinical scenariowith a low pretest probability will require a test with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Con-versely, a high pretest probability presentation can be conﬁrmed by a test with only aver-age sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
I-6. The answer is D.   (Chap. 3)   A positive likelihood ratio can only be interpreted in the
context of a pretest probability of disease. Disease prevalence in a certain region contrib-utes to the patient’s pretest probability. However, other factors such as the patient’s age,clinical history and risk factors for the disease in question are also important in deter-mining pretest probability. Armed with an estimated pretest probability and a positivetest with a known likelihood ratio, the clinician can estimate a posttest probability of dis-ease. Generally, diagnostic tests are most useful in patients with a medium pretest proba-bility (25–75%) of having a disease. For example, in a patient with a low pretestprobability of disease, a positive test can be misleading in that the patient’s posttest prob-ability of disease is still low. The same applies for a patient with a high pretest probabilityof disease with a negative test: the negative test usually does not rule out disease. It istherefore incumbent upon the physician to have a rough estimate of the pretest probabil-ity of disease, positive likelihood ratio of the diagnostic test, and negative likelihood ratioof the diagnostic test prior to ordering the test.
I-7. and.  I-8. The answers are B and C.   (Chap. 3)   The goal of a meta-analysis is to summarize
the treatment beneﬁt conferred by an intervention. Risk reduction is frequently expressedby relative risk or odds ratios; however, clinicians also ﬁnd it useful to be familiar with theabsolute risk reduction (ARR). This is the difference in mortality (or another endpoint)between the treatment and the placebo arms. In this case, the absolute risk reduction is10% – 2% = 8%. From this number, one can calculate the number needed to treat(NNT), which is 1/ARR. The NNT is the number of patients who must receive the inter-vention to prevent one death (or another outcome assessed in the study). In this case theNNT is 1/8% = 12.5 patients.FIGURE I-4 The receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves for three diagnostic exercise tests for de-
tection of CAD: exercise ECG, exercise SPECT, and ex-
ercise echo. Each ROC curve illustrates the trade-off
that occurs between improved test sensitivity (accuratedetection of patients with disease) and improved testspeciﬁcity (accurate detection of patients without dis-
ease), as the test value deﬁning when the test turns
from “negative” to “positive” is varied. A 45° line wouldindicate a test with no information (sensitivity = speci-ﬁcity at every test value). The area under each ROCcurve is a measure of the information content of thetest. Moving to a test with a larger ROC area (e.g., fromexercise ECG to exercise echo) improves diagnostic ac-
curacy. However, these curves are not measured in the
same populations and the effect of referral biases on theresults cannot easily be discerned. (From KE Fleis-
chmann et al: JAMA 280:913, 1998, with permission.)
False-positive rate (1 – specificity)True-positive rate (1 – sensitivity)1.0
0.80.60.40.2
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
ECHO
SPECT
No Imaging
20 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
I-9. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 3 and 219)   Based on her age and history, the patient’s pretest
probability of coronary artery disease is extremely low. Even though the SPECT scan is a
test with good performance characteristics, a positive test is only meaningful in a patientwith medium pretest probability of coronary disease. This patient’s posttest probability ofcoronary disease is still low to medium. The test should not have been ordered in the ﬁrstplace and is an example of defensive medicine. Any further testing could expose the patientto undue invasive testing and further anxiety. Her aspirin should be stopped; she should bereassured; other causes of chest pain in a healthy young woman should be evaluated.
I-10. The answer is C.   (Chap. 6)   Alzheimer’s disease (AD) affects women twice as com-
monly as men. Women with AD have lower levels of circulating estrogen than age-controlled women without disease. Despite this, placebo-controlled trials have shown nobeneﬁt in terms of cognitive decline for estrogen replacement in women with AD.
I-11. The answer is D.   (Chap. 54)   Men more commonly present with ventricular tachycardia
and women more commonly present with cardiogenic shock after MI. Y ounger women withMI are more likely to die than their male counterparts of similar age. This may be partly re-lated to the observation that physicians are less likely to suspect heart disease in women withchest pain and are less likely to perform diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in women.
I-12. The answer is D.   (Chap. 6)   Exercise electrocardiographic testing has both higher false
positives and false negatives in women than in men. Women with myocardial infarctionsless often receive angioplasty, thrombolytics, aspirin, beta blockers, or CABGs than men.While women have a greater perioperative mortality, lower graft patency rate, and lessangina relief than men after CABG, their 5- and 10-year mortality rates are not differentfrom those of men.
I-13. The answer is D.   (Chap. 6)   Aspirin does not provide primary prevention for myocar-
dial infarction for women with coronary heart disease, but it does provide primary pre-vention for ischemic stroke and is therefore a useful drug for women at risk foratherosclerotic disease. Cholesterol-lowering drugs are as effective in women as in menfor primary and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease. Low HDL and diabetesmellitus are more important risk factors in women than in men. Overall, women receivefewer risk modiﬁcation interventions than men, likely because of the perception that theyare at lower risk of coronary heart disease.
I-14. The answer is C.   (Chap. 10)   Echinacea constituents have in vitro activity to stimulate
humoral and cellular immune responses. Y et clinical trials have not shown convincing ef-ﬁcacy for respiratory infections. Ginkgo biloba  is being evaluated in a large trial to evalu-
ate its efﬁcacy in reducing the rate of onset or progression of dementia. However, there isno current evidence that it improves cognition. Saw palmetto and African plum arewidely purchased by Americans to relieve symptomatic BPH, yet clinical trials of saw pal-metto have not shown efﬁcacy. While St.-John’s-wort showed beneﬁt in small and non-controlled trials, high-quality placebo-controlled trials showed no superiority comparedto placebo for patients with major depression of moderate severity. Only glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate have proven beneﬁt in a large multicenter controlled trial. It is notknown if it slows cartilage degeneration.
I-15. The answer is D.   (Chap. 5)   Steady-state serum levels are achieved after ﬁve elimination
half-lives, when the dosing interval is 50% of the half-life. Therefore, from a pharmaco-kinetic standpoint, the patient may not achieve full efﬁcacy of the antihypertensive agentuntil 10 days into therapy. Therefore checking for effect at 3 days is premature. Doublingthe dose or increasing the frequency may predispose to toxicity. There is no reason to adda second agent or switch to another agent until completing a trial of adequate durationon the current agent.
I-16. The answer is A.   (Chap. 5)   The patient is developing full-blown cirrhosis and as a re-
sult has impaired hepatic clearance of his morphine. This is due to impaired ﬁrst-pass
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 21
metabolism as a consequence of abnormal liver architecture, depressed cytochrome P450
activity, and perhaps portacaval shunting. Physical and laboratory examinations revealevidence of worsening cirrhosis and opiate toxicity. Hepatic encephalopathy and sub-acute bacterial peritonitis are considerations in the cirrhotic patient with impaired men-tal status. However, the patient has no discernible ascites and no evidence of hepaticencephalopathy on examination. The focus should be on reducing centrally acting thera-pies such as morphine, rather than adding another medicine such as haloperidol.
I-17. The answer is B.   (Chap. 20)   This patient presents with frostbite of the left foot. The
most common presenting symptom of this disorder is sensory changes that affect painand temperature. Physical examination can have a multitude of ﬁndings, depending onthe degree of tissue damage. Mild frostbite will show erythema and anesthesia. Withmore extensive damage, bullae and vesicles will develop. Hemorrhagic vesicles are due toinjury to the microvasculature. The prognosis is most favorable when the presenting areais warm and has a normal color. Treatment is with rapid rewarming, which usually is ac-complished with a 37 to 40°C (98.6 to 104°F) water bath. The period of rewarming can beintensely painful for the patient, and often narcotic analgesia is warranted. If the pain isintolerable, the temperature of the water bath can be dropped slightly. Compartmentsyndrome can develop with rewarming and should be investigated if cyanosis persists af-ter rewarming. No medications have been shown to improve outcomes, including hep-arin, steroids, calcium channel blockers, and hyperbaric oxygen. In the absence of wetgangrene or another emergent surgical indication, decisions about the need for amputa-tion or debridement should be deferred until the boundaries of the tissue injury are welldemarcated. After recovery from the initial insult, these patients often have neuronal in-jury with abnormal sympathetic tone in the extremity. Other remote complications in-clude cutaneous carcinomas, nail deformities, and, in children, epiphyseal damage.
I-18. The answer is C.   (Chap. 9)   Urinary incontinence occurring randomly without associ-
ated Valsalva or other stress is most likely detrusor overactivity. This disorder is the mostcommon type of incontinence in the elderly, both males and females. In females there isno need to do further testing in a patient with long-standing incontinence; however, inmales urethral obstruction is often coexistent, and urodynamic testing is indicated to in-vestigate this possibility. An abrupt onset of symptoms or associated suprapubic pain ineither sex should prompt cystoscopy and urine cytologic testing to evaluate for bladderstones, tumor, or infection. First-line therapy is behavioral therapy with or without bio-feedback. Frequent timed voiding is often successful. If drugs are imperative, oxybutyninor tolterodine can be tried with close follow-up to ensure that urinary retention does notoccur. Desmopressin must be used with extreme caution in this population. Indeed, pa-tients with heart failure, chronic kidney disease, or hyponatremia should not take thismedication. Indwelling catheters are rarely indicated for this disorder; instead, externalcollection devices or protective pads or undergarments are favored.
I-19. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 5 and 9)   Adverse drug reactions in the geriatric population are
common, occurring two to three times more frequently than they do in younger patients.This is due to several factors. Drug clearance is altered because of decreased renal plasmaﬂow and glomerular ﬁltration as well as decreased hepatic clearance. Furthermore, the vol-ume of distribution of many drugs is decreased with a drop in total body water. However, inolder persons there is a relative increase in fat, which will lengthen the half-life of fat-soluble
medications. Serum albumin levels decline in general in the elderly, particularly in the hospi-talized and sick population. As a result, drugs that are primarily protein-bound, such as war-farin and phenytoin, will have higher free or active levels at similar doses. Care must be takenin interpreting total serum levels for these drugs because a low total level may be accompa-nied by a normal free level and thus be appropriately therapeutic.
I-20. The answer is A.   (Chap. 5)   In population surveys of noninstitutionalized elderly, up to
10% had at least one adverse drug reaction in the prior year. Adverse drug reactions arecommon in the elderly and are related to altered drug sensitivity, impaired renal or he-patic clearance, impaired homeostatic mechanisms, and drug interactions. Long half-life
22 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
benzodiazepines are linked to the increased occurrence of hip fractures in the elderly. The
association may be due to the increased risk of falling (related to sedation) in a popula-tion with a high prevalence of osteoporosis. This association may also be true for otherdrugs with sedative properties such as opioids or antipsychotics. Exaggerated responsesto cardiovascular drugs such as ACE inhibitors may occur because of a blunted vasocon-strictor or chronotropic response to reduced blood pressure. Conversely, elderly patientsoften display decreased sensitivity to beta blockers.
I-21. The answer is C.   (Chap. 5)   Grapefruit juice inhibits CYP3A4 in the liver, particularly at
high doses. This can cause decreased drug elimination via hepatic metabolism and increasepotential drug toxicities. Atorvastatin is metabolized via this pathway. Drugs that may en-hance atorvastatin toxicity via this mechanism include phenytoin, ritonavir, clarithromycin,and azole antifungals. Aspirin is cleared via renal mechanisms. Prevacid can cause impairedabsorption of other drugs via its effect on gastric pH. Sildenaﬁl is a phosphodiesterase in-hibitor that may enhance the effect of nitrate medications and cause hypotension.
I-22. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 18 and 185)   Based on the characteristic rash and Koplik’s
spots, this patient has measles. A rare but feared complication of measles is subacute scle-rosing panencephalitis. His examination does not support epiglottitis as he has no drool-ing or dysphagia. His rash is not characteristic of acute HIV infection, and he lacks thepharyngitis and arthralgias commonly seen with this diagnosis. The rash is not consistentwith herpes zoster, and he is quite young to invoke this diagnosis. Splenic rupture occa-sionally occurs with infectious mononucleosis, but this patient has no pharyngitis, lym-phadenopathy, or splenomegaly to suggest this diagnosis.
I-23.  and.  I-24. The answers are D and D.   (Chap. 215)   This patient has symptoms of an acute
cholinergic crisis as seen in cases of organophosphate poisoning. Organophosphates arethe “classic” nerve agents, and several different compounds may act in this manner, in-cluding sarin, tabun, soman, and cyclosarin. Except for agent VX, all the organophos-phates are liquid at standard room temperature and pressure and are highly volatile, withthe onset of symptoms occurring within minutes to hours after exposure. VX is an oilyliquid with a low vapor pressure; therefore, it does not acutely cause symptoms. However,it is an environmental hazard because it can persist in the environment for a longer pe-riod. Organophosphates act by inhibiting tissue synaptic acetylcholinesterase. Symptomsdiffer between vapor exposure and liquid exposure because the organophosphate acts inthe tissue upon contact. The ﬁrst organ exposed with vapor exposure is the eyes, causingrapid and persistent pupillary constriction. After the sarin gas attacks in the T okyo sub-way in 1994 and 1995, survivors frequently complained that their “world went black” asthe ﬁrst symptom of exposure. This is rapidly followed by rhinorrhea, excessive saliva-tion, and lacrimation. In the airways, organophosphates cause bronchorrhea and bron-chospasm. It is in the alveoli that organophosphates gain the greatest extent of entry intothe blood. As organophosphates circulate, other symptoms appear, including nausea,vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle fasciculations. Death occurs with central nervous systempenetration causing central apnea and status epilepticus. The effects on the heart rate andblood pressure are unpredictable.
Treatment requires a multifocal approach. Initially, decontamination of clothing and
wounds is important for both the patient and the caregiver. Clothing should be removedbefore contact with the health care provider. In T okyo, 10% of emergency personnel de-veloped miosis related to contact with patients’ clothing. Three classes of medication areimportant in treating organophosphate poisoning: anticholinergics, oximes, and anti-convulsant agents. Initially, atropine at doses of 2 to 6 mg should be given intravenouslyor intramuscularly to reverse the effects of organophosphates at muscarinic receptors; ithas no effect on nicotinic receptors. Thus, atropine rapidly treats life-threatening respi-ratory depression but does not affect neuromuscular or sympathetic effects. This shouldbe followed by the administration of an oxime, which is a nucleophile compound thatreactivates the cholinesterase whose active site has been bound to a nerve agent. De-pending on the nerve agent used, oxime may not be helpful because it is unable to bind
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 23
to “aged” complexes that have undergone degradation of a side chain of the nerve agent,
making it negatively charged. Soman undergoes aging within 2 min, thus renderingoxime therapy useless. The currently approved oxime in the United States is 2-prali-doxime. Finally, the only anticonvulsant class of drugs that is effective in seizures causedby organophosphate poisoning is benzodiazepines. The dose required is frequentlyhigher than that used for epileptic seizures, requiring the equivalent of 40 mg of diaz-epam given in frequent doses. All other classes of anticonvulsant medications, includingphenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, and valproic acid, will not improve seizures re-lated to organophosphate poisoning.
I-25. The answer is E.   (Chap. 215)   Cyanide is an asphyxiant that causes death by inhibiting
cellular respiration. It is a colorless liquid or gas that has a typical smell of almonds. Theonset of symptoms after cyanide exposure is rapid and usually begins with eye irritation.The skin is ﬂushed. The patient rapidly develops confusion, tachypnea, and tachycardia.With severe poisoning, death results from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)and hypoxemia with lactic acidosis. The antidote for cyanide poisoning is a combinationof sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate.
I-26. The answer is A.   (Chap. 215)   Sulfur mustard was the ﬁrst weaponized chemical and
was ﬁrst used in World War I, accounting for 70% of the estimated 1.3 million chemicalcasualties in that war. It remains a signiﬁcant terrorist threat today because of simplicityof manufacture and effectiveness. Sulfur mustard constitutes both a vapor and a liquidchemical threat. It acts as a DNA-alkylating agent and affects rapidly dividing cells. Theeffects of sulfur mustard are delayed 2 h to2 days, depending on the severity of exposure.The organs most commonly affected are the skin, eyes, and airways. Late bone marrowsuppression also occurs 7 to 21 days after exposure. Erythema resembling a sunburn isthe mildest form of injury. This progresses to large ﬂaccid bullae containing sterile serousﬂuid. Large portions of body-surface area may be affected, similar to the situation inburn victims. The primary airway lesion is necrosis of the mucosa. Clinically, this causespseudomembrane formation and, in the most severe cases, airway obstruction. Laryn-gospasm may also occur. The effects on the eyes include conjunctivitis, blepharospasm,pain, and corneal damage. Death results from airway obstruction, pneumonia, secondaryskin infections, or sepsis with neutropenia. There is no antidote to mustard gas or liquidexposure. Treatment is supportive, ensuring adequate analgesia and hydration. Applica-tion of topical glucocorticoids before denudation of skin may be useful. Small blistersshould be left intact, but large bullae should be unroofed. The ﬂuid is sterile and does notcontain mustard derivatives. Silver sulfadiazine or other topical antibiotics should beused to prevent secondary skin infections. Conjunctival irritation should be treated withtopical solutions, including antibiotics. Petroleum jelly should be applied to the eyelids toprevent them from sticking together. Intubation may be necessary for protection againstairway obstruction. Repeated bronchoscopy may also be needed to remove pseudomem-branes. Finally, careful follow-up for the development of marrow suppression is needed.
I-27. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 18 and 167)   This patient likely has Rocky Mountain spotted
fever. The headache and thrombocytopenia after a recent camping trip in a rickettsial en-demic region are typical ﬁndings. As this is usually a serologic diagnosis requiring signif-icant laboratory processing time, and can be fatal, empirical therapy with doxycycline iswarranted. The lack of a rash does not preclude this diagnosis because the characteristicmacular rash spreading from the wrists and ankles centripetally appears 2–5 days afterthe ﬁrst fever. Atovaquone is used for babesiosis, a disease that is deﬁned by hemolysisand is not prevalent in the Ozarks. The patient has no evidence of bacterial meningitis towarrant empirical coverage. While fever and myalgias are typical of inﬂuenza, it is mostcommon in winter and does not typically cause thrombocytopenia.
I-28. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 18 and 129)    This case is likely toxic shock syndrome, given
the clinical appearance of septic shock with no positive blood cultures. The characteristicdiffuse rash, as well as the lack of a primary infected site, make staphylococcus the morelikely inciting agent. Streptococcal toxic shock usually has a prominent primary site of in-
24 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
fection, but the diffuse rash is usually much more subtle than in this case. Staphylococcal
toxic shock can be associated with immunosuppression, surgical wounds, or retainedtampons. Mere Staphylococcus aureus  colonization (with an appropriate toxigenic strain)
can incite toxic shock. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines state thatmeasles, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and leptospirosis need to be ruled out serologi-cally to conﬁrm the diagnosis. However, this patient is at very low risk for these diagnosesbased on vaccination and travel history. JRA would become a consideration only if the fe-vers were more prolonged and there was documented evidence of organomegaly and en-larged lymph nodes.
I-29. The answer is C.   (Chap. 214)   Using the characteristics listed in the question, the CDC
developed classiﬁcations of biologic agents that are based on their potential to be used asbioweapons. Six types of agents have been designated as category A: Bacillus anthracis,
botulinum toxin, Y ersinia pestis, smallpox, tularemia, and the many viruses that cause vi-ral hemorrhagic fever. Those viruses include Lassa virus, Rift Valley fever virus, Ebola vi-rus, and yellow fever virus.
I-30. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 18 and 149)   Vibrio vulniﬁcus  is a marine-borne gram-nega-
tive rod that causes overwhelming sepsis in the immunocompromised host, particularlycirrhotic patients. Modes of infection are direct wound inoculation or ingestion via rawseafood. Presentation is rapid with the classic skin ﬁndings described in this case, whichapproximate purpura fulminans as the illness progresses. Mortality is >50%, even withappropriate and early antibiotics.
I-31. The answer is C.   (Chap. 17)   Hyperthermia  occurs when exogenous heat exposure or an
endogenous heat-producing process, such as neuroleptic malignant syndrome or malig-nant hyperthermia, leads to high internal temperatures despite a normal  hypothalamic
temperature set point. Fever  occurs when a pyrogen such as a microbial toxin, microbe
particle, or cytokine resets the hypothalamus to a higher temperature. A particular tem-perature cutoff point does not deﬁne hyperthermia. Rigidity and autonomic dysregula-tion are characteristic of malignant hyperthermia, a subset of hyperthermia. Fever, nothyperthermia, responds to antipyretics.
I-32. The answer is D.   (Chap. 17)   This patient has malignant hyperthermia, for which dan-
trolene and external cooling are appropriate interventions. Malignant hyperthermia oc-curs in individuals with a genetic predisposition that causes elevated skeletal muscleintracellular calcium concentration after exposure to some inhaled anesthetics or succi-nylcholine. Cardiovascular instability is common within minutes. Although malignanthyperthermia is rare, these drugs are used commonly, and without prompt recognitionthe condition may be fatal. There is no role for antipyretics as the thalamic set point fortemperature is likely not altered in the setting of hyperthermia.
I-33. The answer is E.   (Chap. 17)   The elderly and the very young are at highest risk of non-
exertional heat stroke. Environmental stress (heat wave) is the most common precipitat-ing factor, particularly in the bedridden or for those living in poorly ventilated or non-air-conditioned conditions. Medications such as antiparkinson treatment, diuretics, oranticholinergic therapy increase the risk of heat stroke.
I-34. The answer is A.   (Chap. 20)   Initial focus should be aggressive rewarming. Further at-
tempts at deﬁbrillation are unlikely to work until core temperature is normalized.Pharmacologic strategies are also ineffective in the setting of hypothermia, though thepossibility of toxicity based on accumulation of drug does exist once successful re-warming is achieved. If initial active rewarming techniques are ineffective, cardiopul-monary bypass, warmed hemodialysis, peritoneal lavage with warmed ﬂuid, or pleurallavage with warmed ﬂuid should be considered on an emergent basis. A pacemaker willnot be effective for ventricular ﬁbrillation and may provoke arrhythmias due to ven-tricular irritability.
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 25
I-35. The answer is B.   (Chap. 72)   Albumin has a half-life of 2 to 3 weeks and is a sensitive
but nonspecic measure of protein-calorie malnutrition. Other situations in which al-
bumin is low include sepsis, surgery, overhydration, and increased plasma volume, in-cluding congestive heart failure, renal failure, and chronic liver disease. Among theother markers of nutritional state, transferrin has a half-life of 1 week. Prealbumin andretinol-binding protein complex have the same half-life of 2 days. Fibronectin has theshortest half-life: 1 day.
I-36. The answer is C.   (Chap. 20)   This patient has severe frostbite vesiculations implying
deep tissue injury, including the microvasculature. Medical therapy with intravenous ortopical vasodilators is not effective in this setting. Decisions regarding surgical debride-ment and amputation are best made in the chronic stage of management rather thanacutely in the absence of infection. Initially, rewarming and aggressive analgesia with opi-ates are the mainstay of therapy.
I-37. The answer is D.   (Chap. 4)   It is important to contrast the relative risk reduction of an
intervention versus the absolute risk reduction. The ARR is 0.88% – 0.59% = 0.29%(note: rates are per 1000 persons). The relative risk reduction in this case is ~30%. Itmight be predicted, therefore, that this intervention might result in a 30% decrease in co-lon cancer mortality if widely implemented in a target population. However, the ARR ismuch smaller; 1 divided by the absolute risk reduction (1/ARR) equals the numberneeded to treat to prevent one colon cancer death. In this case, that number is ~330.Therefore, while the impact on a population level might be large, it takes a large numberof patients to prevent one event with the intervention (FOBT).
I-38. The answer is B.   (Chap. 4)   Predicted increases in life expectancy are average numbers
that apply to populations, not individuals. Because we often do not understand the true na-ture of risk of disease, screening and lifestyle interventions usually beneﬁt a small propor-tion of the total population. For screening tests, false positives may also increase the risk ofdiagnostic tests. While Pap smears increase life expectancy overall by only 2–3 months, forthe individual at risk of cervical cancer, Pap smear screening may add many years to life.The average life expectancy increases resulting from mammography (1 month), PSA (2weeks), or exercise (1–2 years) are less than from quitting smoking (3–5 years).
I-39. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 4 and 235)   Current guidelines from the National Cholesterol
Education Project Adult Treatment Panel III recommend screening in all adults >20 yearsold. The testing should include fasting total cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipo-protein cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. The screening should be re-peated every 5 years. All patients with Type 1 diabetes should have lipids followed closelyto decrease cardiovascular risk by combining the results of lipid screening with other riskfactors to determine risk category and intensity of recommended treatment.
I-40. The answer is C.   (Chap. 386)   Generalized anxiety disorder is common, with a life-
time prevalence of approximately 5% and with the onset of symptoms often occurringbefore age 20. These patients frequently report having feelings of anxiety and socialphobia that date back to childhood. Clinically, these patients report persistent, exces-sive, and unrealistic worries that prevent normal functioning. In addition, there is of-ten the complaint of feeling “on edge” with nervousness, arousal, and insomnia.However, unlike panic disorder, palpitations, tachycardia, and shortness of breath arerare. Pathophysiologically, there is likely to be impaired function of the GABA receptorwith decreased binding of benzodiazepines at that receptor. Therapy should include acombination of drugs and psychotherapy. Drugs that may be used include benzodiaze-pines, buspirone, and anticonvulsants with GABAergic properties, such as gabapentin,
tiagabine, and divalproex. 
I-41. The answer is D.   (Chap. 10; Wilt et al.)   Because plant products are in widespread use in
the well-accepted therapeutic armamentarium of Western medicine (e.g., digoxin, taxol,penicillin), it should not be surprising that several “herbal remedies” have been demon-
26 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
strated in prospective clinical trials to be beneﬁcial. For example, Saint John’s wort is
more effective than placebo for mild to moderate depression; the mechanism is notknown, although the metabolism of several neurotransmitters is inhibited by this sub-stance. Kava products have antianxiolytic activity. Extracts of the fruit of the saw pal-metto, Serona repens , have been shown to decrease nocturia and improve peak urinary
ﬂow compared with placebo in males with benign prostatic hypertrophy. Saw palmettoextracts affect the metabolism of androgens, including the inhibition of dihydrotestoster-one binding to androgen receptors. 
I-42. The answer is D.   (Chap. 76)   The most important feature of patients with anorexia ner-
vosa is refusal to maintain even a low-normal body weight. The full syndrome of an-orexia nervosa occurs in about 1 in 200 individuals. These patients are always markedlyunderweight, hardly ever menstruate, and often engage in binge eating. The mortalityrate is 5% per decade. The etiology of this serious eating disorder is unknown but proba-bly involves a combination of psychological, biologic, and cultural risk factors. This ill-ness often begins in an obsessive or perfectionist patient who starts a diet. As weight lossprogresses, the patient has increasing fears of gaining weight and engages in stricter diet-ing practices. This disorder essentially occurs only in cultures in which thinness is valued,suggesting a strong cultural inﬂuence. Bulimia nervosa, in which patients continue tomaintain a normal body weight but typically engage in overeating with binges followedby compensatory purging or purging behavior, has a higher than expected prevalence inpatients with childhood or parental obesity. It is unclear whether anorexia nervosa is he-reditary in nature. 
I-43. The answer is C.   (Chap. 71)   Certain medications, including isoniazid used for tuber-
culosis, 
L-dopa used for Parkinson’s disease, and penicillamine used for scleroderma,
promote vitamin B 6 (pyridoxine) deﬁciency by reacting with a carbonyl group on 5-
pyridoxal phosphate, which is a cofactor for a host of enzymes involved in amino acidmetabolism. Foods that contain vitamin B
6 include legumes, nuts, wheat bran, and meat.
Vitamin B 6 deﬁciency produces seborrheic dermatitis, glossitis, stomatitis, and cheliosis
(also seen in other vitamin B deﬁciencies). A microcytic, hypochromic anemia may re-sult from the fact that the ﬁrst enzyme in heme synthesis (aminolevulinic synthetase) re-quires pyridoxal phosphate as a cofactor. However, vitamin B
6 is also necessary for the
conversion of homocysteine to cystathionine. Consequently, a deﬁciency of this vitamincould produce an increased risk of cardiovascular disease caused by the resultant hyper-homocystinemia.
I-44. The answer is C.   (Chap. 9)   Hypertension and diabetes are the most important chronic
diseases whose prevalence increases with age. In those >65 years old, the prevalence ofhypertension is estimated at 60–85%. These numbers will likely increase in the near fu-ture as the population ages and obesity is more prevalent. Recent data suggest that thefrequency of uncontrolled hypertension is increasing in older adults in the United States.The presence of uncontrolled hypertension accelerates functional and cognitive declinein older adults. These data also have important implications on the frequency of cardio-vascular disease and stroke in older adults.
I-45. The answer is B.   (Chap. 4)   The prevalence of diabetes in older adults is ~18–21%. This
rate will likely increase with increasing obesity in older adults. Diabetes has been linkedwith physical decline, while hypertension has been linked with cognitive decline. How-ever, both disorders are commonly present in the elderly. Diabetes and stroke are mostconsistently associated with a diminished capacity for functional recovery in the elderly.
I-46. The answer is A.   (Chap. 9)   Functional status, as deﬁned by a patient’s ability to provide
for his or her own daily needs, is the most important indicator for prognosis. A decline infunctional status should prompt a search for medical illness, dementia, change in socialsupport, or depression. Screening for functional status should include assessment of ac-tivities of daily living, gait and balance, cognition, vision, hearing, and dental and nutri-tional health.
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 27
I-47.  The answer is A.   (Chaps. 9 and 26)   Delirium can cause prolonged hospitalization and
may be life threatening. It is often underdiagnosed. The Confusion Assessment Method
(CAM) is highly sensitive and speciﬁc for identifying delirium. One common misconcep-tion is that all delirious patients are agitated. In fact, delirium is often associated with adecreased level of consciousness, and patients can appear withdrawn or aloof, rather thanagitated, combative, or anxious. Another crucial diagnostic criterion is that the patient’smental state represents a clear, acute deviation from their baseline status.
I-48. The answer is E.   (Chap. 9)   Fall rates increase with age and have substantial effect on
mortality and morbidity. Some 3–5% of falls result in fracture, and falls are an indepen-dent risk factor for nursing home placement. All older adults should have at least annualfall risk assessment and be asked about falls during clinic visits. Fall prevention necessi-tates a multidisciplinary approach including management of medical conditions associ-ated with falls, limitation of psychotropic medicines (especially benzodiazepines),frequent visual examinations, interventions such as tai-chi geared towards stabilizinggait, and close examination of circumstances associated with past falls.
I-49. The answer is B.   (Chap. 9)   Physical examination of all immobilized or bed-bound pa-
tients must include careful examination of common sites for pressure sores. The heels, lat-eral malleoli, sacrum, ischia, and greater trochanters account for 80% of pressure sores.Shear forces and moisture are predisposing factors. In older adults and nursing home resi-dents, the development of a pressure sore increases mortality fourfold. Infectious compli-cations include osteomyelitis and sepsis. A fairly innocuous-appearing lesion can progressto a deep, easily infected, and very difﬁcult-to-manage stage 4 decubitus ulcer in a veryshort period of time without aggressive wound care and off-loading by nursing staff.
I-50. The answer is E.   (Chap. 9)   This patient has stress incontinence. Stress incontinence,
due to dysfunction of the urethral sphincter, is common in women and uncommon inmen. It most often occurs with activities that increase abdominal pressure. The mostcommon risks are previous childbearing, gynecologic surgery, and menopause. Kegel ex-ercises may be useful, but surgery is considered the most effective intervention. Oxybuty-nin and bladder training exercises are sometimes effective for urge incontinence, which ismore common in men. α-Adrenergic blockers and 5- α-reductase inhibitors are used for
prostate hypertrophy in men. Close monitoring for hyperglycemia and diabetes is usefulin elderly patients with incontinence, but this patient does not describe polyuria and herpast vaginal deliveries and pelvic surgery put her at risk for stress incontinence.
I-51. The answer is B.   (Chap. 23)   The patient has Brown-Séquard syndrome, likely because
of a new multiple sclerosis plaque. The lack of cranial nerve involvement and other corti-cal deﬁcits, in the presence of upper extremity and lower extremity deﬁcits, suggests ahigh cord lesion. These often lead to differing ipsilateral and contralateral sensory deﬁ-cits, as in this patient. The combination of left side motor deﬁcit and right side sensorydeﬁcit makes the cortical lesion unlikely. Brainstem lesions will also not account for thelocalization and bilaterality. A cervical cord root lesion would not be bilateral.
I-52. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 23 and 292)   The patient’s weight loss predisposes him to su-
perior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome. Due to loss of the omental fat pad, the SMAcompresses the duodenum in this condition, leading to obstruction. Laparoscopy is lesslikely to be of diagnostic beneﬁt (i.e., for adhesions) as the patient has never had abdom-inal surgery. An upper GI series may be useful for evaluation of an obstructing mass,though SMA syndrome is more likely in this clinical context. While patients with ad-vanced HIV are at risk of a variety of infectious causes of diarrhea, they are unlikely topresent with acute small-bowel obstruction. Serum CEA levels may be elevated in coloncancer but would not be helpful in explaining the cause of acute small-bowel obstruction.
I-53. The answer is C.   (Chap. 23)   Amyloidosis predisposes to autonomic neuropathy, which
in turn causes both orthostasis and gastroparesis. Gastrointestinal amyloidosis is anotherpossibility in this patient, though his early satiety and bloating are typical for gastropare-
28 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
sis. Treatment can include pro-motility agents, such as metoclopramide as well as dietary
changes that this patient has already instituted on his own. Small-bowel obstructionwould not be relieved by smaller frequent meals. Gastric cancers may present with earlysatiety and vomiting as well as weight loss. Diverticulosis and irritable bowel syndromepresent with lower gastrointestinal symptoms.
I-54. The answer is D.   (Chap. 39)   This patient has developed tardive dyskinesia that may be
irreversible. Prochlorperazine is an antidopaminergic agent that suppresses emesis byacting centrally at the dopamine D
2 receptors. This class of agents is most effective for the
treatment of medication-, toxin-, and metabolic-induced emesis. However, these agentsfreely cross the blood-brain barrier and can cause anxiety, galactorrhea, sexual dysfunc-tion, and dystonic reactions. Tardive dyskinesia is the most serious of these neurologictoxicities. Erythromycin is a prokinetic that may worsen nausea and vomiting. Ondanse-tron acts at the 5-HT
3 receptor and has no antidopaminergic activity. Scopolamine is an
anticholinergic that may cause delirium, stupor, and other neurologic side effects, butnot tardive dyskinesia. Glucocorticoids also do not cause tardive dyskinesia.
I-55. The answer is D.   (Chap. 34)   Chronic cough is deﬁned as a cough present for >8 weeks.
Mycoplasma  infection can cause a cough acutely or a postinfectious cough that persists
for as long as 8 weeks. Asthma, postnasal drip, and reﬂux disease are the three most com-mon causes of chronic cough in a nonsmoker not taking angiotensin-converting enzyme(ACE) inhibitors. All ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, can cause chronic cough, pos-sibly due to altered bradykinin metabolism. Patients with ACE inhibitor cough may beswitched to an angiotensin receptor blocker, which does not cause cough.
I-56. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 34 and 252)   The putrid smell and polymicrobial gram stain
suggest a polymicrobial lung abscess consisting of normal oral ﬂora, including anaerobesand Streptococcus viridans . The anaerobes contribute to the putrid smell of the sputum.
The patient’s protracted mild clinical course is typical for this process, and his alcoholismis a clear risk factor as well. The superior segment of the right lower lobe is the most com-mon site of aspiration and lung abscess, followed by the posterior segment of the rightupper lobe and the superior segment of the left lower lobe. Tricuspid valve endocarditismay cause lung abscess due to staphylococcal ( S. aureus ) bacteremia. The patient is
clearly at risk for pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) given his imprisonment; however, thesputum would not likely be putrid and purulent with this microscopic appearance. Thecavitary lesions of TB are typically in the upper lobes. Wegener’s granulomatosis maycause cavitary masses, but they are usually multiple and would not have putrid sputum.Squamous cell lung cancer may also cavitate by outgrowing its blood supply and may besecondarily infected, although usually not with this degree of anaerobic characteristics.
I-57. The answer is D.   (Chap. 34)   Hemoptysis in these conditions originates from the bron-
chial circulation that is supplied by the aorta or intercostal arteries, not the pulmonaryartery. Because of the high pressures, bleeding may be sudden and massive. Embolizationof bronchial arteries feeding the suspected area may stop the bleeding. Cough suppres-sants may help decrease the irritating effects on the submucosa of coughing. Direct bron-choscopic cautery may be beneﬁcial for friable tumors. Selective intubation of the rightmain bronchus may be supportive by protecting the non-bleeding right lung. Occlusionof the right lung bronchus by coagulating blood could lead to respiratory failure. The pa-tient should be placed with his non-bleeding lung up, not down, as the goal is to preventblood from entering the non-bleeding lung.
I-58. The answer is B.   (Chaps. e9 and 277)   A collapsing variant of focal segmental glomerulo-
sclerosis is typically diagnostic of HIV nephropathy, which presents with proteinuria andsubacute loss of renal function. Diabetes typically causes thickening of glomerular basementmembrane, mesangial sclerosis, and arteriosclerosis. Multiple myeloma causes proteinuriavia deposition of light chains in the glomeruli and tubules and the development of renalamyloidosis. Microscopy shows amyloid proteins with Congo red staining. SLE causes mem-branous and proliferative nephritis due to immune complex deposition. Wegener’s granulo-matosis and microscopic polyangiitis cause pauci-immune necrotizing glomerulonephritis.
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 29
I-59. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 35 and 244)   This patient has central cyanosis, which is due to
arterial desaturation. In central cyanosis, skin and mucus membranes are affected. Pe-
ripheral cyanosis is the result of peripheral hypoperfusion of various causes either due tohypotension, as with heart failure (e.g., myocardial infarction, myocarditis) or sepsis, ordue to peripheral vasoconstriction, as with cold exposure or Raynaud’s phenomenon. Inthese cases, the extremities are most affected, with the mucus membranes usually spared.This patient has Eisenmenger’s physiology with right-to-left shunting of deoxygenatedblood. Other causes of central cyanosis include severe lung disease, pulmonary arteriove-nous malformations, alveolar hypoventilation, or hemoglobin abnormalities.
I-60. The answer is C.   (Chap. 35)   Cirrhotic patients are at risk of developing pulmonary ar-
teriovenous ﬁstulas. These, as well as portopulmonary shunts, cause platypnea and orth-odeoxia (dyspnea and desaturation with sitting up). The ﬁstulas, which are preferentiallyat the base of the lungs, increase the right-to-left shunting (and therefore hypoxemia)when upright. In the supine position, the apex of the lung is better perfused and the hy-poxemia improves. The oxygen desaturation in the upright position causes the platypnea.Congenital pulmonary arteriovenous malformations may also cause platypnea and orth-odeoxia. Ventricular septal defects will not cause hypoxemia until they develop right-to-left shunting.
I-61. The answer is D.   (Chap. 36)   The patient’s positional edema that is worse in hot
weather strongly suggests idiopathic edema. Idiopathic edema occurs mostly in womenand is characterized by episodes of edema that may include abdominal distention. It istypically diurnal, with worsening after being upright for prolonged periods or in hotweather. Cyclical edema occurs with menstruation and is related to estrogen stimulationof ﬂuid retention. Congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and cirrhosis are ruledout by history and by physical and laboratory examinations. Initially, therapy should in-clude patient education regarding the need to lie ﬂat for a few hours each day, as well ascompression stockings put on in the mornings. Idiopathic edema may be related to ab-normal activation of the renin-angiotensin system, and angiotensin-converting enzymeinhibitors may play a role if conservative interventions are not effective. Diuretics may bebeneﬁcial initially but may lose effectiveness if used continuously.
I-62. The answer is D.   (Chap. 37)   Palpitations are a common complaint among patients
who report ﬂuttering, pounding, or thumping sensation in the chest. Palpitations mayarise from cardiac, psychiatric, miscellaneous (thyrotoxicosis, drugs, ethanol, caffeine,cocaine), or unknown causes. While most arrhythmias do not cause palpitations, patientswith palpitations and known heart disease or risk factors are at risk of atrial or ventricu-lar arrhythmias. Overall, patients complaining of palpitations >15 min are more likely tohave psychiatric causes. Most patients with palpitations do not have serious arrhythmias.History, physical examination, Holter monitoring, and electrocardiography may be usedto evaluate for arrhythmias.
I-63. The answer is D.   (Chap. 7)   Blood pressure >140/90 mmHg during the second trimes-
ter is markedly abnormal. During the second trimester, blood pressure should fall due toa decrease in systemic vascular resistance. Elevated blood pressure is associated with anincrease in perinatal morbidity and mortality. Delaying diagnosis may be harmful. Bloodpressure should be performed in the sitting position because in the lateral recumbent po-sition the decrease in preload may cause a reduced blood pressure. The diagnosis of hy-pertension requires measurement of two elevated blood pressures at least 6 hours apart.Hypertension may be caused by preeclampsia, chronic hypertension, gestational hyper-tension, or renal hypertension. If hypertension is diagnosed, a safe antihypertensiveshould be initiated and a referral to a high-risk obstetrician should be considered.
I-64. The answer is D.   (Chap. 7)   This patient has severe eclampsia, and delivery should be
performed as rapidly as possible. Mild eclampsia is the presence of new-onset hyperten-sion and proteinuria in a pregnant woman after 20 weeks’ gestation. Severe eclampsia iseclampsia complicated by central nervous system symptoms (including seizure), marked
30 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
hypertension, severe proteinuria, renal failure, pulmonary edema, thrombocytopenia, or
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Delivery in a mother with severe eclampsia be-fore 37 weeks’ gestation decreases maternal morbidity but increases fetal risks of compli-cations of prematurity. Aggressive management of blood pressure, usually with labetalol,decreases maternal risk of stroke. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angio-tensin-receptor blockers should not be used due to the potential of adverse effects on fetaldevelopment. Eclamptic seizures should be controlled with magnesium sulfate; it hasbeen shown to be superior to phenytoin.
I-65. The answer is D.   (Chap. 7)   Mitral stenosis is associated with ﬂash pulmonary edema,
atrial arrhythmias, and risk of maternal death. The risk is likely related to the increase incardiac output and circulating blood volume during pregnancy. Sudden death due to ar-rhythmia or pulmonary hypertension may occur. During delivery, patients with mitralstenosis should be managed with careful heart rate control. Balloon valvuloplasty maybe performed during pregnancy. The decrease in systemic vascular resistance duringpregnancy makes mitral, tricuspid, and aortic regurgitation generally well tolerated be-cause heart failure is not likely.  If aortic stenosis is severe, balloon valvuloplasty may benecessary.
I-66. The answer is C.   (Chap. 7)   Pregnancy causes a hypercoagulable state, and DVT oc-
curs in about 1 in 2000 pregnancies. DVT occurs more commonly in the left leg thanthe right leg during pregnancy due to compression of the left iliac vein. Approximately25% of pregnant women with DVT have a factor V Leiden mutation, which also pre-disposes to preeclampsia. Prothrombin G20210A mutation (homozygotes and hetero-zygotes), and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677 mutation (homozygotes) arealso risk factors for DVT during pregnancy. Coumadin is strictly contraindicated dur-ing the ﬁrst and second trimesters due to risk of fetal abnormality. Low-molecular-weight heparin is appropriate therapy but may be switched to heparin infusion at de-livery, if an epidural is likely. Ambulation, rather than bedrest, should be encouragedas with all DVTs. There is no proven role for local thrombolytics or an inferior venacava ﬁlter in pregnancy. The latter would be considered only in scenarios where anti-coagulation is not possible.
I-67. The answer is E.   (Chap. 7)   Pregnancy complicated by diabetes is associated with
greater maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality rates. Women with gestationaldiabetes are at increased risk of preeclampsia, delivering infants large for gestational age,and birth lacerations. Their infants are at risk of hypoglycemia and birth injury. Appro-priate therapy can reduce these risks. Not performing diabetes screening during preg-nancy should be considered only in low-risk patients (age <25, no obesity, no history ofgestational or other diabetes, no diabetes in ﬁrst-degree relatives).
I-68. The answer is B.   (Chap. 8)   The goal of the evaluation is to identify patients at inter-
mediate or high risk of postoperative complications. The history and physical exami-nation should focus on detecting symptoms or signs of occult cardiac or pulmonarydisease. Preoperative laboratory testing should be carried out for speciﬁc conditionsbased on the clinical examination. Many questionnaires exist to identify patients at in-termediate or high risk. There is no proven role for chest radiograph in this contextprovided that the cardiopulmonary history and physical examination are within nor-mal limits.
I-69. The answer is C.   (Chap. 8)   The six criteria listed in the question represent the Re-
vised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI). A patient with none of the risk factors has a <1%chance of a postoperative major cardiac event.  Patients with three of the criteria have a10% chance of having a cardiac event in the perioperative or intraoperative period.This is therefore considered an appropriate cut-off point for noninvasive cardiac imag-ing/stress testing to occur.
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 31
I-70. The answer is B.   (Chap. 8)   Pharmacologic stress tests, such as dopamine, persantine,
or adenosine, are more useful than exercise testing in patients with functional limitation.
While their positive predictive value is poor, they have excellent negative predictive valuefor identifying patients at risk for perioperative myocardial infarction or death. The pa-tient is on adequate medical therapy for his ischemic cardiomyopathy but neverthelesshad a very high-risk stress test. He should proceed to cardiac catheterization for eitherendovascular stenting or referral to bypass surgery.
I-71. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 24 and 366)    Parkinson’s disease is common, affecting 1–2%
of the population >65 years. Axial stiffness, stooped posture, shufﬂing gait, and pill-rolling tremor are distinctive. Other progressive neurologic disorders such as those listedabove may present with Parkinsonian features. The atypical Parkinsonian syndromes canbe difﬁcult to differentiate from Parkinson’s disease. However, the presence of a pill-rolling tremor is speciﬁc for Parkinson’s disease.
I-72. The answer is A.   (Chap. 24)   The gait of cerebellar dysfunction most closely resembles a
drunken gait with very poor balance, frequent lurching, and high risk of fall. However,unlike patients with inner ear dysfunction, these symptoms are usually not associatedFIGURE I-70 Composite algorithm for cardiac risk assessment and stratiﬁcation in patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery. Stepwise clinical evaluation: [1] Emergency surgery; [2] Prior coronary revasculariza-
tion; [3] Prior coronary evaluation; [4] Clinical assessment; [5] Revised cardiac risk index; [6] Risk modi-ﬁcation strategies. Preventative medical therapy = beta blocker and statin therapy. RCRI, revised cardiacrisk index. (Adapted from KA Eagle et al and TH Lee et al.)ALGORITHM FOR CARDIAC RISKASSESSMENT
Only continue treatment in 
patients requiring long-term preventive medical therapyIdentify, initiate treatment in patients requiring preventive or continue long-term medical preventive therapyNoninvasive cardiac test
6Clinical Assessment- Age > 70, < 4 METs- Signs of CHF , AS- EKG changes—ischemia or infarctOnly continue treatment in patients requiring long-term preventive medical therapy4
Revised cardiac risk index stratification 5
Positive stress test
Poor functional capacity, history of anginaNegative stress test
Initiate and/or continue optimal preventive medical therapy treatmentCoronary revascu-larization ACC/AHA guidelines
Surgery
SurgerySurgerySurgery
SurgeryYe sYe sYe s
NoNoNoRecent coronary evaluationIf no, or recurrent symptoms
Favorable findings- Adequate test- Adequately reviewed 3 SurgeryNeed for surgery 1 Surgery Emergent
Coronary revascularization within 5 yearsIf yes, and no recurrent symptoms2 Surgery
RCRI = 0 RCRI = 1 – 2 RCRI = ≥3Urgent Elective
32 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
with subjective dizziness, vertigo, and nausea. Frontal gait disorder or gait apraxia is
common in the elderly and has a variety of causes. Typical features include a wide base ofsupport, short strides, shufﬂing, and difﬁculty with starts and turns. The most commoncause of frontal gait is subcortical small-vessel cerebrovascular disease. Patients with Par-kinsonian syndromes have a shufﬂing gait, with difﬁculty initiating and turning en bloc.Sensory ataxia may be caused by tabes dorsalis or vitamin B
12 neuropathy. Patients have a
narrow base and look down; their gait is regular with path deviation. They have no difﬁ-culty initiating gait but have postural instability and falls.
I-73. The answer is E.   (Chap. 24)   The inability to walk in a stable fashion without direct vi-
sual observation of the feet suggests a deﬁcit in proprioception due to large-ﬁber neu-ropathy. The narrow-based gait with no difﬁculty initiating gait and normal strength isconsistent with sensory ataxia. Classically this was caused by tabes dorsalis, althoughvitamin B
12 deﬁciency is a treatable disease that may present with this form of neurop-
athy and gait disorder. This suspicion is even greater in the context of a macrocyticanemia, a ﬁnding that is consistent with vitamin B
12 deﬁciency. Further signs of im-
paired proprioception, such as decreased ability to sense joint position, are even moresuggestive of the diagnosis. Cerebellar ataxia will have a wide-based gait with a lurchingstride. Cerebrovascular disease may present with a frontal gait disorder that is charac-terized by a wide-based, slow, shufﬂing gait. Parkinson’s disease also causes a shufﬂinggait with difﬁculty initiating and turning en bloc. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis doesnot cause a sensory or proprioceptive neuropathy but will alter gait due to muscleweakness.
I-74. The answer is E.   (Chap. 25)   Abnormalities of the tests listed with intact primary sensa-
tion in an alert cooperative patient identify lesions in the parietal cortex or the thalamo-cortical projection to the parietal lobe. Though two-point discrimination is a commonscreening technique for cortical sensory deﬁcits, each of the above techniques is a quickand helpful alternative to evaluate for a cortical sensory deﬁcit. Two-point discriminationis best tested with a set of calipers that simultaneously touch the skin. Normally, one candistinguish 3-mm separation of points on the pads of the ﬁngers. T ouch localization isperformed by having the patient close his or her eyes and identify the site of the examinertouching the patient lightly (with ﬁnger or cotton swab).
I-75. The answer is B.   (Chap. 29)   This patient has a Marcus Gunn pupil, or afferent pupil
defect. As the response is only abnormal when light is shone in her left eye, this impliesan afferent defect in that eye mediated by retinal or optic nerve damage. The right andleft efferent systems are intact, based on normal pupillary constriction bilaterally withlight exposure to the right eye. A corneal defect in the left eye may impair vision butwould not block light transmission to the left retina and optic disc: pupillary responseswould therefore remain intact. Common causes of a Marcus Gunn pupil include retro-bulbar optic neuritis and other optic nerve diseases.
I-76. The answer is E.   (Chap. 29)   This patient has a bitemporal hemianopia implying a lesion
at the optic chiasm. Crossed ﬁbers are more damaged than uncrossed lesions by compres-sion. Therefore mass lesions at the chiasm may cause bilateral temporal visual ﬁeld defects.Sellar lesions such as pituitary adenoma, meningioma, craniopharyngioma, and aneurysmcan lead to this bitemporal hemianopia, which may be subtle to the patient and the exam-iner. Optic nerve lesions such as ischemic optic neuropathy, retinal vascular occlusion, ad-vanced glaucoma, or optic neuritis will cause a horizontal scotoma. Post-chiasmic lesions,cortical lesions, or geniculate body lesions will cause homonymous hemianopia.
I-77. The answer is A.   (Chap. 29)   A red and painful eye is often caused by a corneal abra-
sion. History is very useful to determine the pretest probability of this type of lesion, be-cause it will be increased in the context of contact lens use, recent eye trauma, orparticulate exposure. Cobalt-blue examination with ﬂuorescein is then used to conﬁrmthe presence of corneal abrasion.  It is particularly important as it occasionally reveals adendritic pattern consistent with Herpes simplex virus keratitis, a diagnosis that necessi-
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 33
tates a very different type of treatment. Lid eversion is useful if there is suspicion that the
foreign body is still present. Corneal abrasion should be treated with topical antibioticointment and patching. Cycloplegia may reduce pain by relaxing the ciliary body.
I-78. The answer is B.   (Chap. 29)   Conjunctivitis is the most common cause of a red, irri-
tated eye. Pain is minimal and visual acuity is only minimally impacted. It is usually dueto adenovirus infection. Bacterial infection causes a mucopurulent discharge. Conjunc-tivitis invariably presents with ocular discharge, whereas episcleritis does not. Episcleritis,inﬂammation of the episclera, a thin layer between the sclera and the conjunctiva, is oftenmore localized than conjunctivitis, but this cannot always be used to discriminate thetwo. Scleritis, a deeper, more intense inﬂammatory condition than episcleritis, is associ-ated commonly with various connective tissue disorders and should always be consideredin patients with these conditions.
I-79. The answer is B.   (Chap. 29)   Herpes simplex virus (HSV) keratitis is a major cause of
blindness in the developed world. Several clues to the diagnosis of HSV keratitis may bepresent on examination, including periocular vesicles on the skin and a dendritic patternof cornea ulceration on ﬂuorescein examination (which is pathognomonic). However,these ﬁndings are not always present. Viral culture and corneal examination by an experi-enced ophthalmologist should always be performed in cases where the diagnosis is un-clear. Angle-closure glaucoma is rare but can be easily ruled out by an ophthalmologistwith a measure of ocular pressure and slit-lamp examination. Uveitis is notable for “cellsand ﬂare” and occasionally hypopyon in the iris and perilimbic sparing. Endophthalmitisinvolves the entire globe and evokes pain with ocular movement. Internationally, keratitisdue to trachoma is a common cause of blindness, but it is uncommon in the developedworld.
I-80. The answer is E.   (Chap. 29)   Uveitis involving the anterior portion of the eye is referred
to as iritis  or iridocyclitis . It is diagnosed by slit-lamp examination. The differential diag-
nosis for anterior uveitis includes sarcoidosis, ankylosing spondylitis, juvenile rheuma-toid arthritis, inﬂammatory bowel disease, reactive arthritis, and Behçet’s disease. It mayalso be associated with Lyme disease, syphilis, and other infections. Often no cause isfound. Posterior uveitis involves the vitreous, retina, or choroid. It may also accompanyautoimmune diseases, Behçet’s disease, sarcoid, and inﬂammatory bowel disease. A widevariety of infections may cause posterior uveitis. T oxoplasmosis speciﬁcally causes a pos-terior uveitis rather than an anterior uveitis. The extent of screening for diseases associ-ated with anterior uveitis should depend on a risk assessment for each disorder based onthe history and physical examination.
I-81. The answer is B.   (Chap. 29)   Optic neuritis is a common inﬂammatory lesion of the
optic nerve. In a large clinical study, the mean age of patients was 32 years and 75% of thepatients were female. Pain is common with eye movement. Vision loss usually recoverssomewhat even without treatment. Steroids hasten vision gain but do not alter the ﬁnalvisual acuity. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a primary concern for all newly diagnosed casesof optic neuritis. The 10-year cumulative likelihood of developing multiple sclerosis afteran episode of optic neuritis is almost 40%. Patients with a ﬁrst episode of optic neuritisshould receive a brain MRI to evaluate for MS. It may show characteristic lesions of thedisease prior to the development of CNS symptoms and is a helpful tool for monitoringprogression of disease of this condition while on therapy.
I-82. The answer is A.   (Chap. 29)   Sudden blindness in a patient with fever and high risk of
endovascular infection is endocarditis until proven otherwise. Even primary bacteremiain the absence of cardiac vegetation can seed the eye, often leading to endogenous en-dophthalmitis or central retinal artery occlusion. Another consideration in this patientwould be septic thrombophlebitis with septic emboli to the eye. Stroke, vasculitis, syphi-lis, and hematologic malignancy are possible causes of acute blindness, but are less likelygiven the acute presentation with fever.
34 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
I-83. The answer is B.   (Chap. 216)   Beta radiation consists of small negatively charged elec-
trons. These particles can only travel short distances in tissue and lead primarily to burns
similar to thermal injury. Plastic layers and clothing can prohibit penetration of mostbeta particles. Beta radiation is frequently released in radiation accidents, and radioactiveiodine is the best-recognized member of this group. Alpha radiation consists of heavypositively charged particles consisting of two protons and two neutrons. Because of thelarge size, alpha particles cannot penetrate tissue. However, if alpha particles are internal-ized, they will cause damage to cells within the immediate proximity. The most damagingparticles emitted during a nuclear explosion are gamma rays, x-rays, and neutrons.Gamma rays and x-rays are both photons and have similar ability to penetrate throughmatter. They are the principal type of radiation to cause total body exposure. Neutronsare heavy, but uncharged, and possess a range of energy. These neutrons can ionize DNAdirectly or through generation of free radicals.
I-84. The answer is D.   (Chap. 216)   Much of the initial damage related to a “dirty” bomb is
related to the power of the blast rather than the radiation. Following a terrorist attack, itis important to identify all individuals who might have been exposed to radiation. Theinitial treatment of these individuals should be to stabilize and treat the most severely in-jured.  Those with severe injuries should have contaminated clothing removed prior totransportation to the emergency room, but further care should not be withheld for addi-tional decontamination as the risk of exposure to health care workers is low. Individualswith minor injuries who can be safely decontaminated without increasing the risk ofmedical complications should be transported to a centralized area for decontamination.A further consideration regarding treatment following radiation exposure is the totaldose of radiation that an individual was exposed to. At a dose <2 Gy, there are usually nosigniﬁcant adverse outcomes, and no speciﬁc treatment is recommended unless symp-toms develop. Many individuals will develop ﬂulike symptoms. However, a completeblood count should be obtained every 6 h for the ﬁrst 24 h because bone marrow sup-pression can develop with radiation exposure as low as 0.7 Gy. The earliest sign of this is afall in the lymphocyte count of >50%. Potential treatments of radiation exposure includeuse of colony-stimulating factors and supportive transfusions. Stem cell transfusion andbone marrow transplantation can be considered in the case of severe pancytopenia thatdoes not recover. However, this is controversial, given the lack of experience with the pro-cedure for this indication. Following the Chernobyl nuclear reactor accident, none of thebone marrow transplants were successful.
I-85. The answer is E.   (Chap. 216)   This patient has been exposed to radioactive polonium-
210, a strong emitter of alpha radiation, which can be used as a calibration source or neu-tron source in nuclear reactors. The patient is presenting with acute radiation sickness af-ter an unknown ingestion amount. However, his symptoms began early after ingestion,and there is also severe bone marrow suppression, suggesting that the dose was >2 Gy.Polonium accumulates in the spleen and kidneys. In addition to supportive care withtransfusions and colony-stimulating factors, chelation with dimercaprol should be at-tempted as polonium has a radiologic half-life of 138.4 days and a biologic half-life of 60days. A bone marrow transplant could be considered if his bone marrow fails to recover.The presumed ingestion occurred >36 h previously, and a gastric lavage is unlikely to behelpful. Potassium iodide is useful in radioactive iodine poisoning or overdose.
I-86. The answer is C.   (Chap. 215)   Mustard gas (sulfur mustard) is a vesicant agent that has
been used as a chemical agent of warfare and terrorism since World War I. In World War I,sulfur mustard was responsible for 70% of the 1.3 million individuals killed by chemicalwarfare, but overall, it had a mortality rate of only 1.9%. Sulfur mustard is composed ofboth vapor and liquid components that can cause damage to epithelial surfaces. However,the effects of mustard gas exposure are delayed several hours after exposure. An initial clueto which agent the individuals were exposed was the smell of horseradish or burned garlic,which is characteristic of mustard gas. The earliest effects of mustard exposure involve thenose, sinuses, and pharynx. Common symptoms include burning in the nares, epistaxis,
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 35
sinus pain, and pharyngeal pain. Damage to the upper airway may cause laryngitis and
nonproductive cough. Lower airway involvement results in nonproductive cough anddyspnea, but pulmonary hemorrhage is rare. Pseudomembranes may form and cause air-way obstruction. The eyes are the most sensitive organ to mustard vapor injury with ashorter latency to symptoms than the skin. Ocular symptoms include irritation, conjunc-tivitis, photophobia, blepharospasm, pain, and corneal damage. Erythema of the skin be-gins 2 h to 2 days after exposure and is greatest at warm, moist locations such as the axillae,neck, antecubital fossae, perineum, and genitalia. Small vesicles may develop, which coa-lesce to form bullae. The bullae are usually large and ﬂaccid and ﬁlled with a clear to straw-colored ﬂuid. Death from mustard gas exposure is usually due to sepsis and respiratoryfailure, although high-dose exposure can lead to bone marrow failure 7–21 days after theinitial exposure. Phosgene oxime is also a vesicant agent that may present with similarsymptoms, but it can be differentiated from mustard gas by its pungent pepperish odor.Further, phosgene presents with immediate symptoms and pain. Chlorine is a gas thatcauses inhalant damage to the lungs with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema as the pri-mary presentation. Cyanide is an asphyxiant with rapid onset of symptoms, includingdeath. Soman is a nerve agent that would present with cholinergic symptoms of miosis,salivation, muscle fasciculations, and copious secretions. The symptoms have a rapid on-set, with respiratory depression and death within minutes of exposure.
I-87. The answer is F .   (Chap. 215)   These individuals have been exposed to organophospho-
rus nerve agents (soman, sarin, tabun, cyclosarin, and VX) that act by inhibition of tissuesynaptic acetylcholinesterase. The symptoms of nerve agents are those of a cholinergic cri-sis. Symptoms manifest in the order in which organ systems are exposed. When nerveagents are released as a vapor, the ﬁrst organ that is usually affected is the eyes with miosisand a feeling that the world is “going black,” as was reported during the T okyo subway ter-rorist attack in which sarin was released. Exposure of the nasopharynx to organophos-phates causes rhinorrhea, excessive salivation, and drooling. Bronchorrhea and coughfrequently occur. After inhalation of the toxin, it is rapidly absorbed into the blood acrossthe alveolar-capillary membrane. The gastrointestinal tract is usually rapidly affected oncethe agents are in the bloodstream, with resultant diarrhea, cramping, nausea, and vomit-ing. When death occurs due to nerve agents, it is usually because of the central nervoussystem (CNS) effects of these agents. Acetylcholine and its receptor are widely distributedin the brain, and exposure to large amounts of organophosphate agents leads to rapid un-consciousness, seizures, and central apnea. Nerve agents have a short half-life in circula-tion, and thus, if intervention is made rapidly, improvement in symptoms should likewisebe rapid, without subsequent recurrence of symptoms. The initial treatment for nerveagents is administration of atropine, which is widely available worldwide. Atropine actsquickly at muscarinic acetylcholine receptors to alleviate the central apnea but does not re-verse the neuromuscular effects. In addition to anticholinergic therapy with atropine, useof oximes is also recommended after nerve gas exposure. Oximes such as 2-pralidoxime(2-PAM) reactivate the cholinesterase to restore normal enzyme function. In individualswith severe CNS toxicity and seizures, benzodiazepines, such as diazepam, are the treat-ment of choice. Typical anticonvulsant drugs, such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, phe-nobarbital, and valproic acid are ineffective in treating the seizures caused by nerve agents.
I-88. The answer is B.   (Chap. 358)   This child has the classic clinical ﬁndings of phenylketo-
nuria, an autosomal recessive disorder of amino acid metabolism in which phenylalaninecannot be converted to tyrosine. It is the most common inherited disorder of amino acidmetabolism. Untreated or unrecognized cases will usually have a normal birth but willrapidly begin to show signs of this illness, which include microcephaly, mental retarda-tion, and seizures. The “mousy” odor is due to phenylacetate accumulation in skin, hair,and urine. The toxicity of phenylalanine is due to its inhibition of transport of otheramino acids necessary for normal protein, myelin, and neurotransmitter synthesis.Screening for phenylalanine in the blood should occur prior to 3 weeks of age (usuallythis is done at birth) to prevent symptoms. Treatment consists of lifelong dietary phenyl-alanine restriction and tyrosine supplementation. If detected at birth, affected children
36 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
do not develop the aforementioned complications. Women with phenylketonuria who
become pregnant must maintain strict control before and during pregnancy to avoidcongenital defects, microcephaly, growth retardation, and mental retardation in the baby.
I-89. The answer is A.   (Chap. 358)   Alkaptonuria is a rare disorder of homogentisic acid oxi-
dase deﬁciency which leads to urinary excretion and tissue accumulation of oxidized ho-mogentisic acid. Patients may present in their thirties or forties with arthritis and darklycolored urine, as well as tissue pigmentation (ochronosis) from homogentisic acid. The ar-thritis is typically in the large joints such as hips, knees, shoulders, and low back. The gray-brown pigmentation is characteristic and can involve the sclera and the ear. The diagnosisshould be suspected in a patient whose urine darkens to blackness. Hawkinsinuria is a re-
lated disorder of amino acid metabolism, in which a 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenaseenzyme defect leads to failure to thrive in infancy. Unlike most amino acid disorders, it isautosomal dominant. Tryptophanuria results in mental retardation, skin photosensitivity,and ataxia; however, the enzyme defect leading to this phenotype has not been identiﬁed.Hyperprolinemia type I is caused by a proline oxidase defect and is typically benign. Ho-mocystinuria is caused by a cystathionine β-synthase defect and leads to mental retardation.
I-90.   and.  I-91. The answers are C and D.   (Chap. 356)   Myophosphorylase deﬁciency (type V
glycogen storage disease), also known as McArdle disease, is the most common adult gly-cogen storage disease. The enzyme deﬁciency limits ATP production via glycogenolysis. Itis characterized by exercise intolerance, muscle cramping, myoglobinuria, and elevatedCKs (at rest and increased with exercise). Symptoms usually develop in adulthood as aresult of either brief intense activity or sustained exertion. Rhabdomyolysis after intenseactivity may cause myoglobinuria and subsequent renal failure and is the major clinicalrisk about which patients should be warned. Heart disease does not occur. The mostcommon childhood disorder glycogen storage disease is glucose-6-phosphatase deﬁ-ciency (type I), also known as von Gierke’s disease, which presents at age 3–4 monthswith growth retardation and hepatosplenomegaly. Lactate dehydrogenase deﬁciency andpyruvate kinase deﬁciency present similarly to McArdle disease but are very rare.
I-92. The answer is C.   (Chap. 356; J Shen et al.)   Type III glycogen storage disease, a deﬁ-
ciency in debranching enzyme, causes abnormalities in glycogen degradation. Clinicalmanifestations include hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, short stature, variable skeletal my-opathy, and cardiomyopathy. Dementia does not occur. When liver and muscle are in-volved, the disease is termed type IIIa; however, in 15% of patients, liver diseasepredominates and these patients are characterized as having type IIIb disease. Fasting ke-tosis will occur if glucose/protein intake is not maintained. In most patients, hepatomeg-aly improves with age; however, chronic liver disease and cirrhosis may occur inadulthood, requiring liver transplantation. Hepatocellular carcinoma has also been re-ported. Treatment consists of dietary management with frequent high-carbohydratemeals and possible nocturnal drip feeding to avoid hypoglycemia. Linkage analysis mark-ers can be used for screening carriers and prenatal diagnosis.
I-93. The answer is C.   (Chap. 64)   Presymptomatic testing applies to diseases where a speciﬁc
genetic alteration is associated with a near 100% likelihood of developing the disease, suchas Huntington’s disease. In contrast, predisposition testing predicts a risk for disease that is<100%. The presence of the apolipoprotein E allele ( ε4) does not predict with 100% accu-
racy individuals who will develop Alzheimer’s; therefore, this patient’s testing is an exam-ple of predisposition testing. Not everyone with this marker will develop the disease, andindividuals without this marker may develop Alzheimer’s. Other examples of predisposi-tion testing include hereditary breast cancer. The patient does not have any signs or symp-toms of dementia, and he is not being discriminated against in this scenario.
I-94. The answer is E.   (Chap. 63)   There is a very tight association between increasing mater-
nal age and trisomy. Race, geography, and socioeconomic factors do not affect this rela-tionship. In women under 25, 2% of all conceptions are trisomic. The vast majority oftrisomic conceptions will spontaneously abort; only trisomy 13, 18, 21 (Down syn-
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 37
drome) and sex chromosome trisomies survive to term in measurable numbers. Women
>42 years of age have a 33% chance of a trisomic conception. Despite this well-describedassociation, little is known about the mechanism that drives it.
I-95. The answer is E.   (Chap. 63)   Human cells contain 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs of autoso-
mal chromosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes, XX in females and XY in males.Deviation in the number or structure of these chromosomes is common and is estimatedto occur in 10–25% of all pregnancies. They are the most common cause of fetal loss. Inpregnancies surviving to term, they are the leading known cause of birth defects andmental retardation.
I-96. The answer is C.   (Chap. 343)   This group of genetic conditions often presents with dis-
orders of sexual differentiation. Genetically, Klinefelter syndrome results from a meioticnondysjunction of sex chromosomes during gametogenesis, producing a 47,XXY indi-vidual. Phenotypically, these individuals are male but have eunuchoid features, small tes-tes, decreased virilization, and gynecomastia. The other disorders listed in the questionmay result in sexual ambiguity, more commonly in males. In mixed gonadal dysgenesis,there is mosaicism resulting from the genotype 46,XY/45,X. Depending on the propor-tion of cells with the 46,XY genotype, the phenotype can be either male or female. T estic-ular dysgenesis results from the absence of müllerian inhibiting substance duringembryonic development and may be caused by multiple genetic mutations and may beassociated with the absence of müllerian-inhibiting substance and reduced testosteroneproduction. Feminization may also occur through androgen insensitivity and mutationsin the androgen receptor. Virilization of females with resultant ambiguous sexual differ-entiation most commonly occurs in patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).The most common cause of CAH is 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency, which results in ambigu-ous female genitalia, hypotension, and salt wasting.
I-97. The answer is E.   (Chap. 343)   Turner syndrome, or gonadal dysgenesis, is a common
chromosomal disorder that affects 1 in 2500 female births. The most common geneticdefect is the 45,XO karyotype, which causes half of all phenotypic cases of this syndrome.Age at diagnosis is variable, based on the clinical manifestations. Most cases are diag-nosed perinatally on the basis of reduced fetal growth or lymphedema at birth with nu-chal folds, a low posterior hairline, or left-sided cardiac defects. Some girls may not bediagnosed in childhood and come to attention much later in life because of delayedgrowth and lack of sexual maturation. Limited pubertal development occurs in up to30% of girls with Turner syndrome, with approximately 2% reaching menarche. Owingto the frequency of congenital heart and genitourinary defects, a thorough workupshould be done after the diagnosis, including an echocardiogram and renal imaging.Long-term management includes growth hormone replacement during childhood andestrogen replacement to maintain bone mineralization and feminization. 
I-98. The answer is B.   (Chap. 357)   This patient presents with the classic ﬁndings of an in-
herited disorder of connective tissue, particularly Marfan syndrome. The presentation isnot consistent with the bony deformities or blue sclera seen in patients with osteogenesisimperfecta, and he is tall with long extremities, which makes chondroplasia very unlikely.However, his hypermobility and lens disorders suggest Marfan syndrome or, less com-monly, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Given the high risk of aortic root disease in Marfan syn-drome, echocardiography is indicated in this patient. The other screening tests are notspeciﬁc to Marfan syndrome and are not appropriate in a 30-year-old male.
I-99. The answer is C.   (Chap. 62)   Neoplastic disorders may arise from mutations in DNA that
affect oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, apoptotic genes, and DNA repair genes. Severalgenetic disorders involving DNA repair enzymes underscore the importance of these muta-tions. Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum have defects in DNA damage recognition andin nucleotide excision and repair. These patients often have skin cancers as a result of themutagenic effects of ultraviolet light. Ataxia-telangiectasia is characterized by large telangi-ectatic lesions on the face, cerebellar ataxia, immunologic defects, and hypersensitivity to
38 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
ionizing radiation. Mutation in the ATM gene that causes AT gives rise to defects in meiosis
and increasing damage from ionizing radiation. Fanconi’s anemia is caused by mutations inmultiple complementation groups that are characterized by various congenital anomaliesand a marked predisposition to aplastic anemia and acute myeloid leukemia. HNPCC iscaused by mutations in one of several mismatch repair genes that result in microsatellite in-stability and a high incidence of colon, ovarian, and uterine cancers. Fragile X syndrome iscaused by unstable trinucleotide repeats that destabilize DNA. It is characterized by X-linked inheritance and typical large ears, macroorchidism, and mental retardation.
I-100. The answer is C.   (Chap. 62)   Mendelian inheritance patterns do not apply to mitochon-
drial genetics. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) consists of small encoding transfer and ribo-somal RNAs and various proteins that are involved in oxidative phosphorylation andadenosine triphosphate (ATP) generation. mtDNA exists as a circular chromosome withincells. The mitochondrial genome does not recombine. The genetic material that is intro-duced into the egg by the sperm does not contain mitochondrial DNA, therefore, inheri-tance is maternal. All the children of an affected mother will inherit the disorder. Anaffected father will not transmit the disorder. The clinical manifestations of the various dis-orders in mitochondrial genetics are characterized by alterations in oxidative phosphoryla-tion that lead to reductions in the ATP supply and apoptosis. Areas of high dependence onoxidative phosphorylation include skeletal and cardiac muscle and the brain. During repli-cation, the number of mitochondria can drift among various cells and tissues, resulting inheterogeneity, or heteroplasmy. This results in further variation in the clinical phenotype.Acquired mutations in the mitochondrial genome are thought to play a signiﬁcant role inage-related degenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease.
I-101. The answer is B.   (Chap. 62)   Genetic imprinting is gene inactivation that results in
preferential expression of an allele depending on its parental origin. It has an importantrole in a number of diseases, including malignancies. Abnormal expression in the pater-nally derived copy of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) gene results in the cancerpredisposing Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Uniparental disomy is the inheritance ofdual copies of either maternal or paternal chromosomes. This may result in similar phe-notypes, as in the case of imprinting. The Prader-Willi and Angelman’s syndromes mayresult from uniparental disomy involving inheritance of defective maternal or paternalchromosomes, respectively. Similarly, hydatidiform moles may contain normal numbersof diplid chromosomes, all of which are of paternal origin. The opposite occurs in ovar-ian teratomas. Lyonization is epigenetic inactivation of one of the two X chromosomes inevery cell of the female. Somatic mosaicism is the presence of two or more genetically dis-tinct cell lines in the tissue of an individual. The term anticipation is often used to refer to
diseases caused by trinucleotide repeats that are often characterized by worsening of clin-ical phenotypes in successive generations. These diseases, such as Huntington’s diseaseand fragile X syndrome, are characterized by expansion of these repeats in subsequentgenerations of individuals, resulting in earlier and often more severe clinical phenotypes.
I-102. The answer is D.   (Chap. 357)   Connective tissue is composed of macromolecules (col-
lagen, elastin, ﬁbrillin, proteoglycans, etc.) that are assembled into an insoluble extracellu-lar matrix. Disorders of any of these macromolecules may result in a disorder ofconnective tissue. Osteogenesis imperfecta is caused by mutations in type I procollagen.
Over 400 mutations have been found in patients with OI. Clinically, it is characterized bydecreased bone mass, brittle bones, blue sclerae, dental abnormalities, joint laxity, andprogressive hearing loss. The phenotype may range from severe disease with in utero deathto milder forms with lesser severity and survival into adulthood. Ehlers-Danlos syndromeis a heterogenous set of disorders characterized by joint laxity, hyperelasticity of the skin,and other defects in collagen synthesis. A variety of defects have been identiﬁed in differ-ent types of collagen as well as enzymes that facilitate collagen cross-linking. Marfan syn-drome is characterized by a triad of features: long, thin extremities (with arachnodactylyand loose joints), reduced vision as a result of ectopia lentis, and aortic aneurysms. Defectsin the ﬁbrillin gene are responsible for this syndrome. Alport syndrome is caused by muta-
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 39
tions in type IV collagen, resulting in the most common phenotype of X-linked inheri-
tance, hematuria, sensorineural deafness, and lenticonus. McArdle’s disease is a defect inglycogenolysis that results from myophosphorylase deﬁciency.
I-103. The answer is D.   (Chap. 355)   Lysosomes are subcellular organelles that contain speciﬁc
hydrolyases that allow the processing and degradation of proteins, nucleic acids, carbohy-drates, and lipids. Lysosomal storage diseases result from mutations in various genes forthese hydrolyases. Clinical symptoms result from the accumulation of the undegraded mac-romolecule. Tay-Sachs disease is caused by a deﬁciency of hexosaminidase A. Buildup ofG
M2 gangliosides results in a phenotype that is characterized by a fatal progressive neurode-
generative disease. In the infantile form, these patients have macrocephaly, loss of motorskills, an increased startle reaction, and a macular cherry red spot. The juvenile-onset formpresents with ataxia and progressive dementia that result in death by age 15. The adult-onsetform is characterized by clumsiness in childhood, progressive motor weakness in adoles-cence, and neurocognitive decline. Death occurs in early adulthood. Survival to the third orfourth decade is rare. Splenomegaly is uncommon. The disease is seen most commonly inAshkenazi Jews, with a carrier frequency of about 1 in 30. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.
I-104. The answer is D.   (Chap. 355)   Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage
disorder caused by decreased activity of acid β-glucosidase. Nearly 200 mutations have been
described. Type 1 Gaucher disease can present from childhood to young adulthood. The aver-age age at diagnosis is 20 years in white people. Clinical features result from an accumulationof lipid-laden macrophages, termed Gaucher cells, throughout the body. Hepatosplenomeg-aly is present in virtually all symptomatic patients. Bone marrow involvement is common,with subsequent infarction, ischemia, and necrosis. Anemia and thrombocytopenias may oc-cur. Bone pain is common. Although the liver and spleen may become massive, severe liverdysfunction is very rare. The disease is most common in Ashkenazi Jewish populations. Thediagnosis is made by measuring enzyme activity. Enzyme therapy is currently the treatment ofchoice in signiﬁcantly affected patients. Other therapies include symptomatic management ofthe blood cytopenias and joint replacement surgery for bone injury. Type 2 Gaucher disease isa rare, severe central nervous system (CNS) disease that leads to death in infancy. Type 3 dis-ease is nearly identical to type 1 disease except that the course is more rapidly progressive.
I-105. The answer is A.   (Chap. 62)   The information provided in the pedigree is adequate to
determine the mode of a single-gene inheritance pattern. The example provided is typicalof patients with hemophilia A or Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy. Other examples exist.X-linked recessive inheritance is marked by the fact that the incidence of the trait is muchhigher in males than in females. The genetic trait is passed from an affected male throughall his daughters to, on average, half their sons. The trait is never transmitted directly fromfather to son. The trait may be transmitted through a series of carrier females; if that oc-curs, the affected males are related to each other through the female, as in this case.
I-106. The answer is A.   (Chap. 62)   Many common diseases are known to “run in families” yet
are not inherited in a simple Mendelian fashion. It is likely that the expression of these disor-ders depends on a family of genes that can impart a certain degree of risk and then be modi-ﬁed by subsequent environmental factors. The risk of the development of disease in a relativeof an affected person varies with the degree of relationship; ﬁrst-degree relatives (parents,siblings, and offspring) have the highest risk, which in itself varies with the speciﬁc disease.Many of these multifactorial genetic diseases are inherited in a greater frequency in personswith certain HLA (major histocompatibility system) types. For example, there is a tenfold in-creased risk of celiac sprue (gluten-sensitive enteropathy) in persons who have HLA-B8. Thisgenotype also imparts an increased risk for chronic active hepatitis, myasthenia gravis, andAddison’s disease. The incidence of diabetes mellitus is much higher in those expressingHLA-D3 and HLA-D4. Spondyloarthropathies, psoriatic arthritis (HLA-B27), hyperthy-roidism (HLA-DR3), and multiple sclerosis (HLA-DR2) are other examples of diseases withhistocompatibility predispositions. By contrast, Wilson’s disease and cystic ﬁbrosis are inher-ited in an autosomal recessive fashion, and adult polycystic kidney disease and neuroﬁbro-matosis are among the disorders inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
40 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
I-107. The answer is C.   (Chap. 19)   Fever of unknown origin (FUO) is deﬁned as the presence
of fevers to >38.3°C (101.0°F) on several occasions occurring for >3 weeks without a de-
ﬁned cause after appropriate investigation into potential causes have failed to yield a diag-nosis. Initial laboratory investigation into an FUO should include a complete blood countwith differential, peripheral blood smear, ESR, C-reactive protein, electrolytes, creatinine,calcium, liver function tests, urinalysis, and muscle enzymes. In addition, speciﬁc testingfor a variety of infections should be performed, including VDRL for syphilis, HIV , CMV ,EBV , PPD testing, and blood, sputum, and urine cultures if appropriate. Finally, theworkup should include evaluation for inﬂammatory disorders. These tests include antinu-clear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, ferritin, iron, and transferrin. In several large studies,infectious etiologies are the most commonly identiﬁed source of FUO. In the earlier studies,infectious etiologies accounted for 32–36% of all FUO. In more recent studies, up to 30% ofindividuals will not have an identiﬁed cause of FUO, and infectious etiologies continue tocomprise 25% of all FUO. The most common infection causing FUO is extrapulmonary tu-berculosis. Viral and fungal etiologies are also common. In addition, intraabdominal, retro-peritoneal, renal, and paraspinal abscesses should be considered. In earlier studies,neoplasm was the second most common cause of FUO. However, given the improvementsin imaging and diagnostic techniques, neoplasm accounts for fewer cases of FUO than pre-viously described. Presently the second most common cause of FUO is noninfectious in-ﬂammatory disorders. In the elderly, giant cell arteritis can present as an FUO, as can manyother inﬂammatory disease such as polymyositis, Behçet’s disease, and adult Still’s disease.Drug fever and hereditary periodic fever syndromes are grouped in the “miscellaneous” cat-egory and are among the least common causes of prolonged fever of uncertain origin.
I-108. The answer is C.   (Chap. 58; R Crapo et al.)   Chronic hypoxia, seen in people accli-
mated to high altitudes, causes a shift in the oxygen dissociation curve to the right (de-creased afﬁnity) causing more oxygen to be released in tissues deprived of oxygen.This is achieved by increased red blood cell production of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate(2,3-DPG). Four factors decrease the afﬁnity of hemoglobin for oxygen: high tempera-ture, increased partial pressure of carbon dioxide (the Bohr effect), increased levels of2,3-DPG, increase in acidity. The opposite changes in these four factors increase hemo-globin afﬁnity for oxygen and impair delivery of oxygen to peripheral tissues. Healthymen acclimated to altitude (1400 m) have an average pH/Pa
CO2of 7.43/34 mmHg and
healthy women 7.44/33 mmHg. Hemoglobin concentration will increase due to thestimulatory effect of hypoxia on erythropoietin production.
I-109. The answer is E.   (Chap. e3)   Minority patients have poorer health outcomes from many
preventable and treatable conditions such as cardiovascular disease, asthma, diabetes,cancer, and others. The causes of these differences are multifactorial and include socialdeterminants (education, socioeconomic status, environment) and access to care (whichoften leads to more serious illness before seeking care). However, there are also clearly de-scribed racial differences in quality of care once patients enter the health care system.These differences have been found in cardiovascular, oncologic, renal, diabetic, and pal-liative care. Eliminating these differences will require systematic changes in health systemfactors, provider level factors, and patient level factors.
I-110. The answer is B.   (Chap. e6)   T o be able to differentiate among the disorders that cause
memory loss, it should be determined whether the patient has nondeclarative or declara-tive memory loss. A simple way to think of the differences between nondeclarative anddeclarative memory is to consider the difference between “knowing how” (nondeclara-tive) and “knowing who or what” (declarative). Nondeclarative memory loss refers to lossof skills, habits, or learned behaviors that can be expressed without an awareness of whatwas learned. Procedural memory is a type of nondeclarative memory and may involvemotor, perceptual, or cognitive processes. Examples of nondeclarative procedural mem-ory include remembering how to tie one’s shoes (motor), responding to the tea kettlewhistling on the stove (perceptual), or increasing ability to complete a puzzle (cognitive).Nondeclarative memory involves several brain areas, including the amygdala, basal gan-
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 41
glia, cerebellum, and sensory cortex. Declarative memory refers to the conscious memory
for facts and events and is divided into two categories: semantic memory and episodicmemory. Semantic memory refers to general knowledge about the world without speciﬁ-cally recalling how or when the information was learned. An example of semantic mem-ory is the recollection that a wristwatch is an instrument for keeping time. Vocabularyand the knowledge of associations between verbal concepts comprise a large portion ofsemantic memory. Episodic memory allows one to recall speciﬁc personal experiences.Examples of episodic memory include ability to recall the birthday of a spouse, to recog-nize a photo from one’s wedding, or recall the events at one’s high school graduation. Theareas of the brain involved in declarative memory include the hippocampus, entorhinalcortex, mamillary bodies, and thalamus.
I-111. The answer is F .   (Chap. 60)   This patient’s lymphadenopathy is benign. Inguinal nodes
<2 cm are common in the population at large and need no further work up provided thatthere is no other evidence of disseminated infection or tumor, and that the nodes havequalities that do not suggest tumor (not hard or matted). A practical approach would beto measure the nodes or even photograph them if visible, and follow them serially overtime. Occasionally, inguinal lymph nodes can be associated with sexually transmitted dis-eases. However, these are usually ipsilateral and tender, and evaluation for this would in-clude bimanual examination and appropriate cultures, not necessarily pelvic ultrasound.T otal-body CT scan would be indicated if other pathologic nodes suggestive of lym-phoma or granulomatous disease are present in other anatomic locations. Bone marrowbiopsy would be indicated only if a diagnosis of lymphoma is made ﬁrst.
I-112.  The answer is E.   (Chap. 60)   Hard, matted, nontender lymph nodes are worrisome for
tumor and should always prompt a workup, including excisional biopsy, if possible, andexamination for a primary source depending on the location of the nodes. Supraclavicularlymphadenopathy should always be considered abnormal, particularly when documentedon the left side. A thorough investigation for cancer, particularly with a primary gas-trointestinal source, is necessary. Splenomegaly associated with diffuse adenopathy can beassociated with tumor, particularly lymphoma, but is most often associated with systemicinfections, such as mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus, or HIV , that often cause diffuse lym-phadenopathy. Generalized lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly may be found in au-toimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus or mixed connective tissuedisease. T ender adenopathy of the cervical anterior chain is nearly always associated withinfection of the head and neck, most commonly a viral upper respiratory infection.
I-113. The answer is C.   (Chap. 60)   Portal hypertension causes splenomegaly via passive con-
gestion of the spleen. It generally causes only mild enlargement of the spleen as expandedvarices provide some decompression for elevated portal pressures. Myeloﬁbrosis necessi-tates extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen, liver, and even other sites such as theperitoneum, leading to massive splenomegaly due to myeloid hyperproduction.  Autoim-mune hemolytic anemia requires the spleen to dispose of massive amounts of damagedred blood cells, leading to reticuloendothelial hyperplasia and frequently an extremelylarge spleen. Chronic myelogenous leukemia and other leukemias/lymphomas can leadto massive splenomegaly due to inﬁltration with an abnormal clone of cells. If a patientwith cirrhosis or right-heart failure has massive splenomegaly, a cause other than passivecongestion should be considered.
I-114. The answer is A.   (Chap. 60)   The presence of Howell-Jolly bodies (nuclear remnants),
Heinz bodies (denatured hemoglobin), basophilic stippling, and nucleated red bloodcells in the peripheral blood implies that the spleen is not properly clearing senescent ordamaged red blood cells from the circulation. This usually occurs because of surgicalsplenectomy but is also possible when there is diffuse inﬁltration of the spleen with ma-lignant cells. Hemolytic anemia can have various peripheral smear ﬁndings dependingon the etiology of the hemolysis. Spherocytes and bite cells are an example of damagedred cells that might appear due to autoimmune hemolytic anemia and oxidative damage,respectively. DIC is characterized by schistocytes and thrombocytopenia on smear, with
42 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
elevated INR and activated partial thromboplastin time as well. However, in these condi-
tions, damaged red cells are still cleared effectively by the spleen. Transformation to acuteleukemia does not lead to splenic damage.
I-115. The answer is A.   (Chap. 60)   Splenectomy leads to an increased risk of overwhelming
postsplenectomy sepsis, an infection that carries an extremely high mortality rate. The mostcommonly implicated organisms are encapsulated. Streptococcus pneumoniae ,Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae  and sometime gram-negative enteric organisms are most frequently isolated.
There is no known increased risk for any viral infections. Vaccination for S. pneumoniae ,H.
inﬂuenzae,  and Neisseria meningitidis is indicated for any patient who may undergo splenec-
tomy. The vaccines should be given at least 2 weeks before surgery. The highest risk of sepsisoccurs in patients under 20 because the spleen is responsible for ﬁrst-pass immunity andyounger patients are more likely to have primary exposure to implicated organisms. The riskis highest during the ﬁrst 3 years after splenectomy and persists at a lower rate until death.
I-116. The answer is A.   (Chap. 49)   Erectile dysfunction increases with age but is not considered
a normal part of the aging process. This patient has evidence of atherosclerosis, which is themost common organic cause of erectile dysfunction in males. Medications account for 25%of cases of erectile dysfunction: diuretics, beta blockers and other antihypertensives beingcommon culprits. Psychogenic erectile dysfunction can cause or be caused by organic erectiledysfunction. We are given no indication that this patient is experiencing a relationship con-ﬂict or that he has developed performance anxiety. This patient is not clinically hypogonadal.
I-117. The answer is D.   (Chap. 49)   This patient has vasculogenic erectile dysfunction. Sildena-
ﬁl, tadalaﬁl, and vardenaﬁl are the only approved and effective agents for erectile dysfunc-tion due to psychogenic, diabetic, or vasculogenic causes or resulting from postradicalprostatectomy and spinal cord injury. As such, they should be considered as ﬁrst-line ther-apy. If the patient were to fail to respond to oral agents, intraurethral vasoactive substancesare a reasonable next choice. Implantation of a penile prosthesis would be of considerationif intraurethral or intracavernosal injections failed. Sex therapy will not address the or-ganic dysfunction that this patient has, as evidenced by the lack of nocturnal erections.
I-118. The answer is C.   (Chap. 49)   Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) includes disorders of de-
sire, arousal, pain, and muted orgasm. The risk factors for FSD are similar to those inmen including cardiovascular disease, endocrine diseases, neurologic disorders, andsmoking. The female sexual response requires the presence of estrogens and possibly an-drogens. While the neurotransmission for clitoral corporal engorgement are the same asfor men and include nitric oxide, the use of PDE-5 inhibitors for FSD has not beenproven efﬁcacious and should be discouraged until proof is available that they are effec-tive. PDE-5 inhibitors have not been shown to be of more or less beneﬁt in pre- or post-menopausal women. For FSD, behavioral and nonpharmacologic therapies includinglifestyle modiﬁcation, medication adjustment, and use of lubricants should be a ﬁrst step.
I-119. The answer is B.   (Chap. 41)   Patients with unintentional weight loss of >5% of the total
body weight over a 6- to 12-month period should prompt an evaluation. In the elderly,weight loss is an independent predictor of morbidity and mortality. Studies in the elderlyhave found mortality rates of 10–15%/year in patients with signiﬁcant unintentionalweight loss. It is important to conﬁrm the weight loss and the duration of time over whichit occurred. The causes of weight loss are protean and usually become apparent after acareful evaluation and directed testing. A thorough review of systems should be performedincluding constitutional, respiratory, gastrointestinal, and psychiatric. Travel history andrisk factors for HIV are also important. Medications and supplements should be reviewed.The physical examination must include an examination of the skin, oropharynx, thyroidgland, lymphatic system, abdomen, rectum, prostate, neurologic system, and pelvis. A rea-sonable laboratory approach would include an initial phase of testing including the testsoutlined in this scenario. In the absence of signs or symptoms, close follow-up rather thanundirected testing is appropriate. T otal-body scanning with PET or CT has not beenshown to be effective as screening tests without a clinical indication.
I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS 43
I-120. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 56 and 311)    Drugs can trigger inﬂammatory mediators (his-
tamine, leukotrienes, etc.) directly; i.e., the pharmacoimmune concept . These “anaphylac-
toid” responses are not IgE-mediated. NSAIDS, aspirin, and radiocontrast media are
frequent causes of pharmacologically mediated anaphylactoid reactions. Given that this isan investigational drug, it is improbable that patients in this study have taken this drugbefore. T cell clones have been obtained after pharmacologically mediated anaphylactoidreactions, with a majority being CD4+. A constitutively IgE receptor would not manifestsolely after drug exposure.
I-121. The answer is D.   (Chap. 214)   Anthrax is caused by the gram-positive spore-forming
rod Bacillus anthrax. Anthrax spores may be the prototypical disease of bioterrorism. Al-
though not spread person to person, inhalational anthrax has a high mortality, a low in-fective dose (ﬁve spores), and may be spread widely with aerosols after bioengineering. Itis well-documented that anthrax spores were produced and stored as potential bioweap-ons. In 2001, the United States was exposed to anthrax spores delivered as a powder inletters. Of 11 patients with inhalation anthrax, 5 died. All 11 patients with cutaneous an-thrax survived. Because anthrax spores can remain dormant in the respiratory tract for 6weeks, the incubation period can be quite long and post-exposure antibiotics are recom-mended for 60 days. Trials of a recombinant vaccine are underway.
I-122.  The answer is D.   (Chap. 214)   The three major clinical forms of anthrax are gas-
trointestinal (GI), cutaneous, and inhalational. GI anthrax results from eating contami-nated meat and is an unlikely bioweapon. Cutaneous anthrax results from contact withthe spores and results in a black eschar lesion. Cutaneous anthrax had a 20% mortalitybefore antibiotics became available. Inhalational anthrax typically presents with the mostdeadly form and is the most likely bioweapon. The spores are phagocytosed by alveolarmacrophages and transported to the mediastinum. Subsequent germination, toxin elabo-ration, and hematogenous spread cause septic shock. A characteristic radiographic ﬁnd-ing is mediastinal widening and pleural effusion. Prompt initiation of antibiotics isessential as mortality is likely 100% without speciﬁc treatment. Inhalational anthrax isnot known to be contagious. Provided that there is no concern for release of anotherhighly infectious agent such as smallpox, only routine precautions are warranted.
I-123. The answer is F .   (Chap. 214)   Smallpox has been proposed as a potential bioweapon. It
is essential that clinicians be able to recognize this infection clinically and distinguish itfrom the common infection with varicella. Infection with smallpox occurs principallywith close contact, although saliva droplets or aerosols may also spread disease. Approxi-mately 12–14 days after exposure, the patient develops high fever, malaise, nausea, vomit-ing, headache, and a maculopapular rash that begins on the face and extremities andspreads (centripetally) to the trunk with lesions at the same stage of development at anygiven location. This is in contrast to the rash of varicella (chickenpox), which begins onthe face and trunk and spreads (centrifugally) to the extremities with lesions at all stages ofdevelopment at any given location. Smallpox is associated with a 10–30% mortality. Vacci-nation with vaccinia (cowpox) is effective, even if given during the incubation period.
I-124. The answer is C.   (Chap. 214)   Tularemia, caused by the small nonmotile gram-negative
coccobacillus Francisella tularensis, has been proposed as a potential bioweapon (CDC
category A) because of its high degree of environmental infectiousness, potential foraerolization, and ability to cause severe pneumonia. It is not as lethal as anthrax or plague(Yersinia pestis ). Infection with F. tularensis is most common in rural areas where small
mammals serve as a reservoir. Human infections may occur from tick or mosquito bitesor from contact with infected animals while hunting. The isolation of this pathogen intwo patients without obvious exposure risk factors should prompt concern that a terror-ist has intentionally aerosolized F. tularensis  as an agent of bioterror. It is highly infec-
tious, with as few as 10 organisms causing infection, and outbreaks have been reported inmicrobiology laboratory workers streaking Petri dishes. However, it is not infectious per-son-to-person. Streptomycin, doxycycline, gentamicin, chloramphenicol, and ciproﬂoxa-cin are likely effective agents; however, given the possibility of genetically altered
44 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
organisms, broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated pending sensitivity testing. In out-
breaks, tularemia pneumonia has a mortality of 30–60% in untreated patients and <2%with appropriate therapy.
I-125.  The answer is C.   (Chap. 389)   The most common physical effects of smoking mari-
juana are conjunctival infection and tachycardia; however, tolerance for the tachycardiadevelops quickly among habitual users. Smoking marijuana can precipitate angina inthose with a history of coronary artery disease, and such patients should be advised toabstain from smoking marijuana or using cannabis compounds. This effect may be morepronounced with smoking marijuana than cigarettes. Because chronic use of marijuanatypically involves deep inhalation and prolonged retention of marijuana smoke, chronicsmokers may develop chronic bronchial irritation and impaired single-breath carbonmonoxide diffusion capacity (D
LCO). Decreased sperm count, impaired sperm motility,
and morphologic abnormalities of spermatozoa have been reported. Prospective studiesdemonstrated a correlation between impaired fetal growth and development with heavymarijuana use during pregnancy.
I-126. The answer is B.   (Chap. 389)   Although LSD abuse has been a well-known public health
hazard, the use of LSD may be increasing in some communities in the Unites States amongadolescents and young adults. LSD causes a variety of bizarre perceptual changes that canlast for up to 18 h. Panic episodes due to LSD use (“bad trip”) are the most frequent medi-cal emergency associated with LSD. These episodes may last up to 24 h and are best treatedin a specialized psychiatric setting. Marijuana intoxication causes a feeling of euphoria andis associated with some impairment in cognition similar to alcohol intoxication. Heroin in-toxication usually produces a feeling of euphoria and intoxication; panic attacks during us-age are uncommon. Methamphetamine intoxication produces feelings of euphoria anddecreases the fatigue associated with difﬁcult life situations. Psychosis is possible with theingestion of most illicit substances, depending on the user and the environmental setting;however, the classic panic attack associated with the “bad trip” of LSD is distinct in the pre-dominance of paranoia and fear of imminent doom.
I-127. The answer is E.   (Chap. e35)   “Body packing” is a common practice among members of
the illicit drug trade for transport of illicit drugs across international borders. Human“mules” swallow sealed packages of illicit drugs in special bags to conceal the drug fromdrug enforcement ofﬁcials. Because these bags may rupture while in the gastrointestinaltract, all persons who are unconscious at airports, or who develop symptoms after re-turning from a country where drug trafﬁcking is common, should be evaluated for thisparticular contingency. Initial examination is a cursory oriﬁce examination, but abdomi-nal imaging and bowel lavage are necessary in many cases. Conﬁrmed cases need to befollowed closely as further absorption of the drug is possible. Blood cultures and echocar-diogram are only necessary if infective endocarditis is suspected. However, this patienthas no fevers or indication of active drug abuse. CSF analysis would be necessary only ifno obvious cause of the patient’s mental status change were available. As her respiratoryrate is now elevated rather than low, her mental status is normal, and her oxygen satura-tions are high, there is little reason to expect CO
2 retention or hypoxemia. A blood gas
can likely be avoided unless her clinical status changes.
I-128. The answer is D.   (Chap. e35)   Sympathetic toxidromes share many features including
increased pulse, blood pressure, neuromuscular activity, tremulousness, delirium, andagitation. In many cases, these syndromes can be subclassiﬁed according to other featuresor relative strengths of the above symptoms. Sympathomimetics like cocaine and am-phetamines cause extreme elevations in vital signs and organ damage due to peripheralvasoconstriction, usually in the absence of hallucinations. Benzodiazepine and alcoholwithdrawal syndromes present similarly but hallucinations, and often seizures, are com-mon in these conditions. Hot, dry, ﬂushed skin, urinary retention, and absent bowelsounds characterize anticholinergic syndromes associated with antihistamines, antipsy-chotics, antiparkinsonian agents, muscle relaxants, and cyclic antidepressants. Nystag-mus is a unique feature of ketamine and phencyclidine overdose.
45 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
I-129. The answer is E.   (Chap. e35)   Opiate overdose falls broadly into a toxidrome character-
ized by physiologic depression and sedation. If a history is obtained suggesting a toxic in-
gestion or injection, then the diagnosis is straightforward. However, this history is oftenabsent and it can be a challenge initially to differentiate opiate toxicity from other centralnervous system (CNS) and physiologic depressants. Therefore, naloxone should alwaysbe given as a diagnostic and therapeutic trial under circumstances of unexplained alteredmental status, especially in the presence of coma or seizures. An immediate clinical im-provement characterizes opiate overdose. In opiate overdose, abnormal vital signs occurexclusively as a result of central respiratory depression and the accompanying hypoxemia.Low blood pressure in an alert patient should prompt a search for an alternative explana-tion for the hypotension. An anion gap metabolic acidosis with normal lactate is seen insyndromes such as methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion: mental status change usuallyprecedes vital sign changes, and vital signs are often discordant as a result of physiologicadjustments to the severity of the acidosis. Mydriasis is a result of stimulant use. Miosis isassociated with CNS depression. Sweating and drooling are manifestations of cholinergicagents such as muscarinic and micotinic agonists.
I-130. The answer is A.   (Chap. e35)   Lithium interferes with cell membrane ion transport,
leading to nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and falsely elevated chloride. This can causethe appearance of low anion gap metabolic acidosis. Sequelae include nausea, vomiting,ataxia, encephalopathy, coma, seizures, arrhythmia, hyperthermia, permanent move-ment disorder, and/or encephalopathy. Severe cases are treated with bowel irrigation, en-doscopic removal of long-acting formulations, hydration, and sometimes hemodialysis.Care should be taken because toxicity occurs at lower levels in chronic toxicity comparedto acute toxicity. Salicylate toxicity leads to a normal osmolal gap as well as an elevatedanion gap metabolic acidosis, respiratory alkalosis, and sometimes normal anion gapmetabolic acidosis. Methanol toxicity is associated with blindness and is characterized byan increased anion gap metabolic acidosis, with normal lactate and ketones, and a highosmolal gap. Propylene glycol toxicity causes an increased anion gap metabolic acidosiswith elevated lactate and a high osmolal gap. The only electrolyte abnormalities associ-ated with opiate overdose are compensatory to a primary respiratory acidosis.
I-131. The answer is B.   (Chap. e35)   The clinical ramiﬁcations of this question are critical.
Drug effects begin earlier, peak later, and last longer in the context of overdose, comparedto commonly referenced values. Therefore, if a patient has a known ingestion of a toxicdose of a dangerous substance and symptoms have not yet begun, then aggressive gut de-contamination should ensue, because symptoms are apt to ensue rapidly. The late peakand longer duration of action are important as well. A common error in practice is forpatients to be released or watched less carefully after reversal of toxicity associated withan opiate agonist or benzodiazepine. However, the duration of activity of the offendingtoxic agent often exceeds the half-life of the antagonists, naloxone or ﬂumazenil, requir-ing the administration of subsequent doses several hours later to prevent further centralnervous system or physiologic depression.
I-132. The answer is E   (Chap. e35)   Management of the toxin-induced seizure includes ad-
dressing the underlying cause of the seizure, antiepileptic therapy, reversal of the toxin ef-fect, and supportive management. In this patient, lithium toxicity has led to diabetesinsipidus and encephalopathy. The patient was unlikely to take in free water due to his in-capacitated state, and as a result developed hypernatremia. The hypernatremia and lith-ium toxicity are contributing to his seizure and should be addressed with careful freewater replacement and bowel irrigation, plus hemodialysis. As he is not protecting hisairway, supportive management will need to include endotracheal intubation. Antisei-zure prophylaxis with ﬁrst-line agent, a benzodiazepine, has failed, and therefore heshould be treated with a barbiturate as well as a benzodiazepine. Benzodiazepines shouldbe continued as they work by a different mechanism than barbiturates in preventing sei-zures. Phenytoin is contraindicated for the use of toxic seizures due to worse outcomesdocumented in clinical trials for this indication.
46 I. I NTRODUCTION TO  CLINICAL  MEDICINE  — ANSWERS
I-133. The answer is E.   (Chap. e35)   Gastric decontamination is controversial because there
are few data to support or refute its use more than an hour after ingestion. It remains a
very common practice in most hospitals. Syrup of ipecac is no longer endorsed for in-hospital use and is controversial even for home use, though its safety proﬁle is well docu-mented, and therefore it likely poses little harm for ingestions when the history is clearand the indication strong. Activated charcoal is generally the decontamination method ofchoice as it is the least aversive and least invasive option available. It is effective in de-creasing systemic absorption if given within an hour of poison ingestion. It may be effec-tive even later after ingestion for drugs with signiﬁcant anticholinergic effect (e.g.,tricyclic antidepressants). Considerations are poor visibility of the gastrointestinal tracton endoscopy following charcoal ingestion, and perhaps decreased absorption of oraldrugs. Gastric lavage is the most invasive option and is effective, but it is occasionally as-sociated with tracheal intubation and bowel-wall perforation. It is also the least comfort-able option for the patient. Moreover, aspiration risk is highest in those undergoinggastric lavage. All three of the most common options for decontamination carry at least a1% risk of an aspiration event, which warrants special consideration in the patient withmental status change.
I-134. The answer is C.   (Chap. 60)   T o keep body weight stable, energy intake must match en-
ergy output. Energy output has two main determinants: resting energy expenditure andphysical activity. Other, less clinically important determinants include energy expendi-ture to digest food and thermogenesis from shivering. Resting energy expenditure can becalculated and is 900 + 10w (where w = weight) in males and 700 + 7 w in females. This
calculation is then modiﬁed for physical activity level. The main determinant of restingenergy expenditure is lean body mass.
47II. NUTRITION
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:   Choose the one best  response to each question.
II-1.   A 19-year-old woman with anorexia nervosa under-
goes surgery for acute appendicitis. The postoperative
course is complicated by acute respiratory distresssyndrome, and she remains intubated for 10 days. Shedevelops wound dehiscence on postoperative day 10.Laboratory data show a white blood cell count of 4000/µL, hematocrit 35%, albumin 2.1 g/dL, total protein 5.8
g/dL, transferrin 54 mg/dL, and iron-binding capacity 88mg/dL. Y ou are considering initiating nutritional therapyon hospital day 11. Which of the following is true regard-ing the etiology and treatment of malnutrition in thispatient?
A. She has marasmus, and nutritional support should
be started slowly.
B. She has kwashiorkor, and nutritional support should
be aggressive.
C. She has marasmic kwashiorkor, kwashiorkor predom-
inant, and nutritional support should be aggressive.
D. She has marasmic kwashiorkor, marasmus predom-
inant, and nutritional support should be slow.
II-2.    Y ou are seeing a patient in follow-up 2 weeks after
hospitalization. The patient is recovering from nosoco-
mial pneumonia due to a resistant Pseudomonas  spp. His
hospital course was complicated by a deep venousthrombosis. The patient is currently on IV piperacillin/tazobactam and tobramycin via a tunneled catheter, war-farin, lisinopril, hydrochlorothiazide, and metoprolol.Laboratory data this morning show an INR of 8.2. Athospital discharge his INR was stable at 2.5. He has nohistory of liver disease. What is the most likely cause ofthe elevated INR?
A. The patient has inadvertently overdosed.
B. The patient has developed a recurrent deep venous
thrombosis, which has affected the laboratory data.
C. The patient is deﬁcient in vitamin K and needs sup-
plementation.
D. The warfarin prescription was written incorrectly at
the time of discharge.II-3.   A 51-year-old alcoholic man is admitted to the hospi-
tal for upper gastrointestinal bleeding. From further his-tory and physical examination, it becomes apparent thathis bleeding is from gingival membranes. He is intoxi-cated and complains of fatigue. Reviewing his chart youﬁnd that he had a hemarthrosis evacuated 6 months agoand has been lost to follow-up since then. He takes nomedications. Laboratory data show platelets of 250,000,INR of 0.9. He has a diffuse hemorrhagic eruption on hislegs (Figure II-3, Color Atlas).
What is the recommended treatment for this patient’s 
underlying disorder?
A. Folate
B. NiacinC. ThiamineD. Vitamin CE. Vitamin K
II-4.   While working in the intensive care unit, you admit a
57-year-old woman with acute pancreatitis and oliguricrenal failure. Respiratory rate is 26 breaths/min, heartrate is 125 beats/min, and temperature is 37.2°C. Physicalexamination shows marked abdominal tenderness withnormoactive bowel sounds. A CT scan shows an inﬂamedpancreas without hemorrhage. Y ou calculate herAPACHE-I score to be 28. When deciding on when to ini-tiate nutritional replacement in this patient, which of thefollowing statements is true?
A. Bowel rest is the cornerstone of treatment for acute
pancreatitis.
B. Administering parenteral nutrition within 24 h will
decrease the risk of infection and mortality.
C. Enteral feeding supports gut function by secretion
of gastrointestinal hormones that stimulate gut
trophic activity.
D. In severe systemic response to inﬂammation, feed-
ing can be withheld initially because the patient islikely to have adequate, spontaneous oral intake inthe ﬁrst 7 days.
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
48 II. N UTRITION  — QUESTIONS
II-5.   The resting energy expenditure is a rough estimate of
total caloric needs in a state of energy balance. Of these two
patients with stable weights, which person has the highestresting energy expenditure (REE): Patient A, a 40-year-oldman who weighs 90 kg and is sedentary, or Patient B, a 40-year-old man who weighs 70 kg and is very active?
A. 40-year-old man who weighs 90 kg and is sedentary
B. 40-year-old man who weighs 70 kg and is very activeC. REE is the sameD. Not enough information given to calculate the REE
II-6.    All of the following clinical features are common in
patients with anorexia nervosa except
A. Avoid food-related occupationsB. Distorted body imageC. Engage in binge eatingD. Exercise extensivelyE. Rarely complain of hungerF. Socially withdrawn
II-7.   Y ou diagnose anorexia nervosa in one of your new
clinic patients. When coordinating a treatment programwith the psychiatrist, what characteristics should promptconsideration for inpatient treatment instead of schedul-ing an outpatient assessment?
A. Amenorrhea
B. Exaggeration of food intakeC. Irrational fear of gaining weightD. Purging behaviorE. Weight <75% of expected body weight
II-8.   It is hospital day 16 for a 49-year-old homeless patient
who is recovering from alcohol withdrawal and deliriumtremens. She spent the ﬁrst 9 days of this hospitalizationin the intensive care unit but is now awake, alert, andconversant. She has a healing decubitus ulcer, and herbody mass index is 19 kg/m
2. Laboratory data show an al-
bumin of 2.9 g/dL and a prothrombin time of 18 s (nor-mal range). Is this patient malnourished?
A. Cannot be determined, need more information.
B. No. Given her heavy alcohol intake, her prothrom-
bin time is expected to be delayed.
C. No. She has a low resting energy expenditure and
her intact mental state argues against malnutrition.
D. Y es, this degree of hypoalbuminemia is uncommon
in cirrhosis and is likely due to malnutrition.
II-9.   A 42-year-old male patient wants your opinion about vi-
tamin E supplements. He has read that taking high doses ofvitamin E can improve his sexual performance and slow theaging process. He is not vitamin E deﬁcient. Y ou explain tohim that these claims are not based on good evidence. Whatother potential side effect should he be concerned about?
A. Deep venous thrombosis
B. HemorrhageC. Night blindnessD. Peripheral neuropathyE. Retinopathy
II-10.   Doing rounds in the oncology center, you are see a
patient with carcinoid syndrome. Due to the increasedconversion of tryptophan to serotonin, this patient hasdeveloped niacin deﬁciency. All of the following are com-ponents of the pellagra syndrome except
A. dermatitis
B. dementiaC. diarrheaD. dyslipidemiaE. glossitis
II-11.   An 86-year-old woman with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease (COPD), congestive heart failure, and in-sulin-requiring type 2 diabetes mellitus is admitted to theintensive care unit with an exacerbation of her COPD.She is intubated and treated with glucocorticoids andnebulized albuterol. She is also continued on her glargineinsulin, aspirin, pravastatin, furosemide, enalapril, andmetoprolol. On hospital day 8, parenteral nutrition is be-gun via catheter in the subclavian vein. Her insulin re-quirements increase on hospital day 9 due to episodes ofhyperglycemia. On hospital day 10, she develops rales andan increasing oxygen requirement. A chest radiographshows bilateral pulmonary edema. Laboratory data showhypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hypophosphatemiaand a normal creatinine. Her weight has increased by 3 kgsince admission. Urine sodium is <10 meq/dL. All of thefollowing changes in her nutritional regimen will im-prove her volume status except
A. combination of glucose and fat in the parenteral nu-
trition mixture
B. decreasing the sodium content of the mixture to
<40 meq per day
C. increasing the protein content of the parenteral nu-
trition mixture
D. reducing the overall glucose content
II-12.   A new study has been published showing a beneﬁt of
25 mg/day of vitamin X. The recommended estimated av-erage requirement of vitamin X is 10 mg/day, 2 standarddeviations below the amount published in the study. Thetolerable upper limit of vitamin X is unknown. Y our pa-tient wants to know if it is safe to consume 25 mg/day ofvitamin X. Which is the most appropriate answer?
A. Two standard deviations above the estimated aver-
age requirement deﬁnes the tolerable upper limit.
B. 25 mg/day is probably too much vitamin X in 1 day.
C. 25 mg/day is statistically in a safe range of the esti-
mated average requirement.
D. The study was not designed to assess safety and
therefore should not inﬂuence practice.II-9. (Continued)
II. N UTRITION  — QUESTIONS 49
II-13.   An elevation in which of the following hormones is
consistent with the effects of anorexia nervosa?
A. Cortisol
B. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)C. LeptinD. Thyroxine (T
4)
E. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
II-14.   Which of the following statements regarding an-
orexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN) is true?
A. Patients with the purging subtype of BN tend to be
heavier than those with the nonpurging subtype.
B. Patients with the restricting subtype of AN are more
emotionally labile than those with the purging subtype.
C. Patients with the restricting subtype of AN are more
likely to abuse illicit drugs than those with the purg-
ing subtype.
D. The mortality of BN is lower than that of AN.
II-15.   Y ou are seeing a pediatric patient from Djibouti in
consultation who was admitted with a constellation ofsymptoms including diarrhea, alopecia, muscle wasting,depression, and a rash involving the face, extremities, andperineum. The child has hypogonadism and dwarﬁsm.Y ou astutely make the diagnosis of zinc deﬁciency, andlaboratory test conﬁrm this (zinc level <70 µL/dL). What
other clinical ﬁndings is this patient likely to manifest?
A. Dissecting aortic aneurysm
B. Hypochromic anemiaC. HypoglycemiaD. Hypopigmented hairE. Macrocytosis
II-16.   Y ou are rotating on a medical trip to impoverished
areas of China. Y ou are examining an 8-year-old childwhose mother complains of him being clumsy and sickly.He has had many episodes of diarrheal illnesses andpneumonia. His “clumsiness” is most pronounced in theevening when he has to go outside and do his chores. Onexamination, you notice conjunctival dryness with whitepatches of keratinized epithelium on the sclera. What isthe cause of this child’s symptoms?
A. Autoimmune neutropenia
B. Congenital rubellaC. Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) type 1D. Vitamin A deﬁciencyE. Vitamin B
1 deﬁciency 
II-17.   After being stranded alone in the mountains for 8
days, a 26-year-old hiker is brought to the hospital forevaluation of a right femoral neck fracture. He has nothad anything to eat or drink for the past 6 days. Vitalsigns are within normal limits. Weight is 79.5 kg, whichis 1.8 kg less than he weighed 6 months ago. Laboratorydata show a creatinine of 2.5 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogenof 52 mg/dL, glucose 96 mg/dL, albumin 4.1 mg/dL,chloride 105 meq/L, and ferritin on 173 ng/mL. Whichof the following statements is true regarding his risk ofmalnourishment?
A. He has protein-calorie malnutrition due to the rate
of weight loss.
B. He has protein-calorie malnutrition due to his ele-
vated ferritin.
C. He is at risk, but a normal individual can tolerate 7
days of starvation.
D. He is not malnourished because he is not hypogly-
cemic after 6 days of no food or water.
II-18.    Y ou are doing rounds in the intensive care unit on an
intubated patient who is recovering from a stroke and has
diabetic gastroparesis. When suctioning the patient in themorning, she coughs profusely, with thick green secre-tions. Y ou are concerned about the possibility of aspira-tion pneumonia. All of the following measures are usefulin preventing aspiration pneumonia in an intubated pa-tient except
A. combined enteral and parenteral nutritionB. elevating the head of the bed to 30°C. physician-directed methods for formula advancementD. post-ligament of Treitz feeding
II-19.    Which of these features represents a critical distinc-
tion between anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa?
A. Binge eating
B. Electrolyte abnormalitiesC. Self-induced vomitingD. Underweight
II-20.    Y ou are counseling a patient who is recovering from
long-standing anorexia nervosa (AN). She is a 22-year-old woman who suffered the effects of AN for 8 yearswith a nadir body mass index of 17 kg/m
2 and many labo-
ratory abnormalities during that time. Which of the fol-lowing characteristics of AN is least likely to improvedespite successful lasting treatment of the disorder?
A. Amenorrhea
B. Delayed gastric emptyingC. LanugoD. Low bone massE. Salivary gland enlargementII-17. (Continued)
50II. NUTRITION
ANSWERS
II-1. The answer is C. (Chap. 72)   The two major types of protein energy malnutrition are
marasmus and kwashiorkor; differentiating the two is extremely important in the mal-
nourished patient since this directly effects your therapy. This patient has marasmickwashiorkor due to the impact of her anorexia nervosa, the acute stressor of the surgery,and the 10 days of starvation. This patient has chronic starvation (marasmus) as well asthe major sine qua non of kwashiorkor; i.e., reduction of levels of serum proteins. She iskwashiorkor predominant because of the acute starvation and the severely low levels ofserum proteins. Vigorous nutritional therapy is indicated for kwashiorkor.
II-2. The answer is C. (Chap. 71)   There are two natural sources of vitamin K. Vitamin K
1
comes from vegetable and animal sources. Vitamin K 2 is synthesized by enteric bacterial
ﬂora and is found in hepatic tissue. Vitamin K deﬁciency in adults can be seen withchronic small-intestinal disease, in those with obstructed biliary tracts, after small-bowelresection, or in those on broad-spectrum antibiotics. As a result of reducing gut bacteria,T ABLE II-1 Comparison of Marasmus and Kwashiorkor
Marasmus Kwashiorkora
Clinical setting ↓ Energy intake ↓ Protein intake during stress state
Time course to develop Months or years Weeks
Clinical features Starved appearance Well-nourished appearance
Weight <80% standard for 
heightEasy hair pluckabilityb
Triceps skinfold <3 mm Edema
Mid-arm muscle circumference 
<15 cm
Laboratory ﬁndings Creatinine-height index <60% 
standardSerum albumin <2.8 g/dLT otal iron-binding capacity
<200 µg/dL
Lymphocytes <1500/µLAnergy
Clinical course Reasonably preserved respon-
siveness to short-term stressInfectionsPoor wound healing, decubitus 
ulcers, skin breakdown
Mortality Low unless related to underlying 
diseaseHigh
Diagnostic criteria Triceps skinfold <3 mm Serum albumin <2.8 g/dLMid-arm muscle circumference 
<15 cmAt least one of the following:
Poor wound healing, decubitus 
ulcers, or skin breakdown
Easy hair pluckability
b
Edema
aThe ﬁndings used to diagnose kwashiorkor must be unexplained by other causes.
bT ested by ﬁrmly pulling a lock of hair from the top (not the sides or back), grasping with the thumb and
foreﬁnger. An average of three or more hairs removed easily and painlessly is considered abnormal hair
pluckability.
II. N UTRITION  — ANSWERS 51
antibiotics can precipitate vitamin K deﬁciency. Overdose and medication error are plau-
sible explanations but are less likely to be the root cause given the antibiotic exposure.Acute venous thromboses can deplete levels of coagulant proteins (especially protein Cand protein S), but the INR should not be affected.
II-3. The answer is D. (Chap. 71)   This patient has the classic perifollicular hemorrhagic
rash of scurvy (vitamin C deﬁciency). In the United States, scurvy is primarily a diseaseof alcoholics and the elderly who consume <10 mg/d of vitamin C. In addition to non-speciﬁc symptoms of fatigue, these patients also have impaired ability to form matureconnective tissue and can bleed into various sites, including the skin and gingiva. A nor-mal INR excludes symptomatic vitamin K deﬁciency. Thiamine, niacin, and folate deﬁ-ciencies are also seen in patients with alcoholism. Thiamine deﬁciency may cause aperipheral neuropathy (beri-beri). Folate deﬁciency causes macrocytic anemia andthrombocytopenia. Niacin deﬁciency causes pellagra, which is characterized by glossitisand a pigmented, scaling rash that may be particularly noticeable in sun exposed areas.
II-4. The answer is C. (Chap. 73)   In the past, bowel rest was the cornerstone of treatment;
however, the value of adding minimal amounts of enteral nutrition (EN) is widely ac-cepted. Timing of enteral therapy is important. Although administering EN can improvemortality, there is an increased risk of infection. Patients with severe SRI are unlikely tobe able to take adequate, spontaneous oral intake within the ﬁrst week of their hospital-ization. Therefore, enteral nutrition should be considered early for severely sick patients.
II-5. The answer is B. (Chap. 70)   For patients with stable weights, REE can be calculated if
the gender, weight, and activity level are provided. For males, REE = 900 + 10 w, and for
females, REE = 700 + 7 w, where w is weight in kilograms. The REE is then adjusted for
activity level by multiplying 1.2 for sedentary, 1.4 for moderately active, and 1.8 for veryactive individuals. Patient A has an REE of 2160 kcal/day. Patient B has an REE of 2880kcal/day. For a given weight, a higher level of activity increases the REE more than a 20-kg change in weight at a given level of activity.
II-6. The answer is A. (Chap. 76)   Anorexia nervosa (AN) is much less common in men than
women and is more prevalent in cultures where food is plentiful and where thinness is as-sociated with attractiveness. Individuals who pursue occupations that place a premiumon thinness, such as ballet or modeling, are at greater risk of developing anorexia ner-vosa. In patients with AN, as weight loss increases thoughts of food dominate mental life.AN patients may obsessively collect cookbooks and recipes and tend to be drawn to food-related occupations. These patients become socially withdrawn and may also engage inbinge eating, similar to bulimia nervosa patients. AN patients rarely complain of hungeror fatigue and will exercise extensively as a means to achieve weight loss.
II-7. The answer is E. (Chap. 76)   Based on the American Psychiatric Association’s practice
guidelines, inpatient treatment or partial hospitalization is indicated for patients whoseweight <75% of expected for age and height, have severe metabolic disturbances (e.g.,electrolyte disturbances, bradycardia, hypotension), or who have serious concomitantpsychiatric problems (e.g., suicidal ideation, substance abuse). There should be a lowthreshold for inpatient treatment if there has been rapid weight loss or if weight <80% ofexpected. Amenorrhea, exaggeration of food intake, and fear of gaining weight are part ofthe diagnostic criteria for AN, and purging is not uncommon in this population. Weightrestoration to 90% of predicted weight is the goal of nutritional therapy.
II-8. The answer is A. (Chap. 72)   Interactions between illness and nutrition are complex,
therefore many physical and laboratory ﬁndings reﬂect both underlying disease and nu-tritional status. The nutritional evaluation of a patient requires an integration of history,physical examination, anthropometrics, and laboratory studies. The ﬁnding of isolatedhypoalbuminemia may be due to her underlying liver disease and does not necessarily in-dicate malnutrition. This patient is at high risk for malnutrition, but her current statusmay reﬂect malnutrition or sequelae of chronic alcoholism.
52 II. N UTRITION  — ANSWERS
II-9. The answer is B. (Chap. 71)   High doses of vitamin E (>800 mg/d) may reduce platelet
aggregation and interfere with vitamin K metabolism. Doses >400 mg/d may increase
mortality from any cause. Vitamin E excess is not related to increased risk of venousthrombosis. Peripheral neuropathy and a pigmented retinopathy may be seen in vitaminE deﬁciency. Vitamin A deﬁciency is a cause of night blindness.
II-10. The answer is D. (Chap. 71)   Pellagra (niacin deﬁciency) is most commonly a disorder
among people eating corn-based diets but can also be seen in alcoholics. Tryptophan isconverted to niacin with an efﬁciency of 60:1 by weight. Therefore, in a patient with con-genital defects in tryptophan absorption or with increased conversion of tryptophan toserotonin, niacin deﬁciency can develop. The early symptoms of pellagra include an-orexia, irritability, abdominal pain and vomiting, and glossitis. Vaginitis and esophagitismay also occur. The four Ds of pellagra are dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia leading to
death. Dyslipidemia is not a part of the pellagra syndrome.
II-11. The answer is C. (Chap. 73)   The most common metabolic problems related to paren-
teral nutrition (PN) are ﬂuid overload and hyperglycemia. Hypertonic dextrose stimulates amuch higher insulin level than normal feeding, which is evident on hospital day 9 in thisscenario. Hyperinsulinemia stimulates antinatriuretic and antidiuretic hormone, whichleads to sodium and ﬂuid retention as well as increased intracellular transport of potassium,magnesium, and phosphorus. It is not uncommon to see an increase in weight and a lowurine sodium in patients with normal renal function. Providing sodium in limited amountsof 40 meq/day and the use of both glucose and fat in the PN mixture will help reduce ﬂuidretention. Reducing the overall glucose content will also abate the need for higher insulinlevel. The ﬂuid retention in this scenario is not mediated by low protein levels.
II-12. The answer is C. (Chap. 70)   The estimated average requirement (EAR) is the amount
of a nutrient estimated to be adequate for half of the individuals of a speciﬁc age and sex.It is not useful clinically for estimating nutritional adequacy because it is a median re-quirement for a group; 50% of the individuals in a group fall below the requirement and50% fall above it. A person taking the EAR of a vitamin has a 50% risk of inadequate in-take. The recommended dietary allowances (RDA) is deﬁned statistically as 2 standarddeviations above the EAR to ensure that the needs of most individuals are met. In thiscase the study used a dosage of 2 standard deviations above the EAR, which would be theRDA. Data on the tolerable upper limit of a vitamin are usually inadequate to establish avalue for upper limit of tolerability. The absence of a published tolerable upper limit doesnot imply that the risks are nonexistent.
II-13. The answer is A. (Chap. 76)   Regulation of virtually every endocrine system is dis-
turbed in patients with anorexia nervosa (AN). Hypothalamic amenorrhea reﬂects di-minished production of GnRH. Serum leptin levels are reduced due to decreased mass ofadipose tissue, and this is thought to be the mediator of the other neuroendocrine abnor-malities associated with AN. Thyroid function tests resemble the pattern seen in euthy-roid sick syndrome (low-normal or depressed TSH and T
4, depressed T 3, increased
reverse T 3). Serum cortisol and 24-h urine free cortisol are generally elevated without the
expected clinical consequences of hypercortisolism.
II-14. The answer is D. (Chap. 76)   The mortality of AN is ~5% per decade and is much lower
in patients with BN. This is probably mediated by the weight loss and malnutrition asso-ciated with AN. There are two subtypes of BN: purging and nonpurging. Patients withthe nonpurging subtype tend to be heavier and are less prone to electrolyte disturbances.There are also two mutually exclusive subtypes of AN: restricting and purging. Patientswith the purging subtype are more emotionally labile and tend to have other problemswith impulse control such as illicit drug abuse.
II-15. The answer is D. (Chap. 71)   Hypozincemia is most commonly due to poor oral intake
of zinc, although some medications can also inhibit zinc absorption (e.g., sodium valpro-ate, penicillamine, ethambutol). Severe chronic zinc deﬁciency has been described
II. N UTRITION  — ANSWERS 53
among children from Middle Eastern countries as a cause of hypogonadism and dwarf-
ism. Hypopigmented hair is also a part of this syndrome. Hypochromic anemia can beseen in a number of vitamin deﬁciency/excess disorders, including zinc toxicity and cop-per deﬁciency. Copper deﬁciency is also associated with dissecting aortic aneurysm. Hy-poglycemia does not correlate with hypozincemia. Macrocytosis is associated with folateand vitamin B
12 deﬁciency.
II-16. The answer is D. (Chap. 71)   Vitamin A deﬁciency remains a problem of children with
chronically poor diets in parts of Asia, Africa, and China. This child has xerophthalmiawith evidence of mild night blindness. He also has Bitot’s spots (white patches on thesclera). Vitamin A deﬁciency also impairs the host’s ability to ﬁght infection. Mortalityamongst vitamin A–deﬁcient children is substantially higher when infected with diar-rhea, dysentery, measles, malaria, or respiratory disease. Supplementation improves themortality. SCA type 1 does not have any associated ophthalmologic ﬁndings. Autoim-mune neutropenia may account for the repeated bouts of infection, but the constellationof Bitot’s spots and recurrent infection argues against this as the cause. Congenital rubellacauses congenital cataracts, not Bitot’s spots. Vitamin B
1 (thiamine) deﬁciency causes
beri-beri, which is associated with high output cardiac failure or peripheral neuropathy.
II-17. The answer is C. (Chap. 72)   The energy stores in a healthy 70-kg man include ~15 kg
as fat, 6 kg as protein, and 500 mg as glycogen. During the ﬁrst day of a fast, most energyneeds are met by consumption of liver glycogen. During longer fasting, resting energy ex-penditure will decrease by up to 25% (provided there is no ongoing inﬂammation). Inthe presence of water intake and no inﬂammation, a normal individual may fast formonths. A well-nourished individual can tolerate ~7 days of starvation while experienc-ing a systemic response to inﬂammation. The hiker in this scenario has starved for 6 daysand, except for mild acute renal failure, he has compensated well for his starvation.Greater than 10% weight loss in 6 months represents signiﬁcant protein-calorie malnu-trition. This person’s ferritin is only mildly elevated, although a true systemic response toinﬂammation (SRI) does increase the rate of lean tissue loss. Moreover, he has no otherindicators that he is experiencing the systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS).SRI often causes hyperglycemia, not hypoglycemia.
II-18. The answer is C. (Chap. 73)   Tracheal suctioning induces coughing and gastric regurgi-
tation and cuffs on endotracheal tubes seldom protect against aspiration. Effective pre-ventive measures include elevating the head of the bed to 30°, nurse-directed algorithmsfor formula advancement, combining enteral and parenteral feeding, and using post-ligament of Treitz feeding. Recent studies have suggested that constant suction abovethe endotracheal cuff may reduce ventilator-associated pneumonia.
II-19. The answer is D. (Chap. 76)   Anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN) are dis-
tinct clinical entities but share certain features. Many patients with BN have a history ofanorexia, and patients with AN engage in binge eating and abnormal compensatory be-haviors such as purging. The critical distinction between AN and BN depends on bodyweight: patients with AN are signiﬁcantly underweight, whereas patients with BN havenormal weight or are overweight. The presence of electrolyte disturbances confers an in-creased morbidity for both disorders.
II-20. The answer is D. (Chap. 76)   Approximately 25–50% of patients with anorexia nervosa
(AN) recover fully with few physiologic or psychological sequelae. However, many pa-tients have persistent difﬁculties with weight maintenance, depression, and eating distur-bances. Approximately 5% of patients die per decade, usually due to the physical effectsof chronic starvation or from suicide. Virtually all of the physiologic derangements asso-ciated with anorexia nervosa will improve with weight gain. One exception is the loss ofbone mass, which may not recover fully when AN occurs during adolescence (i.e., duringpeak bone mass formation). Psychological health also improves with successful treat-ment, although these patients remain at risk for depression, recurrence, and developmentof bulimia nervosa.
This page intentionally left blank 
55III. ONCOLOGY AND HEMATOLOGY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
III-1.   A 73-year-old male presents to the clinic with 3 months
of increasing back pain. He localizes the pain to the lumbar
spine and states that the pain is worst at night while he is ly-ing in bed. It is improved during the day with mobilization.Past history is notable only for hypertension and remote cig-arette smoking. Physical examination is normal. Laboratorystudies are notable for an elevated alkaline phosphatase. Alumbar radiogram shows a lytic lesion in the L3 vertebra.Which of the following malignancies is most likely?
A. Gastric carcinoma
B. Non-small cell lung cancerC. OsteosarcomaD. Pancreatic carcinomaE. Thyroid carcinoma
III-2.   Patients from which of the following regions need
not be screened for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase(G6PD) deﬁciency when starting a drug that carries a riskfor G6PD mediated hemolysis?
A. Brazil
B. RussiaC. Southeast AsiaD. Southern EuropeE. Sub-Saharan AfricaF. None of the above
III-3.   All the following are vitamin K–dependent coagula-
tion factors except
A. factor XB. factor VIIC. protein CD. protein SE. factor VIII
III-4.    A 31-year-old male with hemophilia A is admitted
with persistent gross hematuria. He denies recent traumaor any history of genitourinary pathology. The examina-tion is unremarkable. Hematocrit is 28%. All the follow-ing are treatments for hemophilia A except
A. desmopressin (DDAVP)B. fresh-frozen plasma (FFP)C. cryoprecipitateD. recombinant factor VIIIE. plasmapheresis
III-5.   Which of the following statements regarding incidence
of and risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma is true?
A. A chemical toxin produced by Aspergillus  species,
aﬂatoxin B has a strong association with develop-
ment of hepatocellular carcinoma and can be foundin stored grains in hot, humid places.
B. In the United States, the incidence of hepatocellular
carcinoma is decreasing.
C. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is not associated with
an increased risk for hepatocellular carcinogen.
D. Fewer than 5% of individuals diagnosed with hepa-
tocellular carcinoma in the United States do nothave underlying cirrhosis.
E. The risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma in
individuals with hepatitis C infection is 50%.
III-6.   Y ou are asked to review the peripheral blood smear
from a patient with anemia. Serum lactate dehydrogenaseis elevated and there is hemoglobinuria. This patient islikely to have which physical examination ﬁnding? (SeeFigure III-6, Color Atlas.)
A. Goiter
B. Heme-positive stoolsC. Mechanical second heart soundD. SplenomegalyE. Thickened calvarium
III-7.   All of the enzyme deﬁciencies that lead to porphyrias are
inherited either as autosomal dominant (AD) or autosomalrecessive (AR) traits with one exception. Which of the fol-lowing most commonly occurs sporadically?
A. 5-ALA dehydratase-deﬁcient porphyria
B. Acute intermittent porphyriaC. Erythropoietic porphyriaD. Porphyria cutanea tardaE. Variegate porphyriaIII-4. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
56 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
III-8.    A 55-year-old female presents with progressive incoor-
dination. Physical examination is remarkable for nystag-
mus, mild dysarthria, and past-pointing on ﬁnger-to-nosetesting. She also has an unsteady gait. MRI reveals atrophyof both lobes of the cerebellum. Serologic evaluation re-veals the presence of anti-Y o antibody. Which of the fol-lowing is the most likely cause of this clinical syndrome?
A. Non-small cell cancer of the lung
B. Small-cell cancer of the lungC. Breast cancerD. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomaE. Colon cancer
III-9.    A 36-year-old African-American woman with systemic
lupus erythematosus presents with the acute onset of leth-argy and jaundice. On initial evaluation, she is tachycardic,hypotensive, appears pale, is dyspneic, and is somewhat dif-ﬁcult to arouse. Physical examination reveals splenomegaly.Her initial hemoglobin is 6 g/dL, white blood cell count is6300/µ L, and platelets are 294,000/ µL. Her total bilirubin is
4 g/dL, reticulocyte count is 18%, and haptoglobin is notdetectable. Renal function is normal, as is urinalysis. Whatwould you expect on her peripheral blood smear?
A. Macrocytosis and PMN’s with hypersegmented nuclei
B. MicrospherocytesC. SchistocytesD. Sickle cellsE. Target cells
III-10.    Y ou are investigating the cause for a patient’s ane-
mia. He is a 50-year-old man who was found to have ahematocrit of 25% on routine evaluation. His hematocritwas 47% 1 year ago. Mean corpuscular volume is 80,mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration is 25, meancorpuscular hemoglobin is 25. Reticulocyte count is 5%.Review of the peripheral blood smear shows markednumbers of polychromatophilic macrocytes. Ferritin is340µg/L. What is the cause of this patient’s anemia?
A. Defective erythroid marrow proliferationB. Extravascular hemolysisC. Intravascular hemolysisD. Iron-deﬁciency anemiaE. Occult gastrointestinal bleeding
III-11.    All the following are associated with pure red cell
aplasia except
A. anterior mediastinal massesB. connective tissue disordersC. giant pronormoblastsD. low erythropoietin levelsE. parvovirus B19 infection
III-12.    A 73-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with 3
weeks of malaise and fevers. His past medical history isnotable only for hypertension controlled with a thiazidediuretic. He smokes one pack of cigarettes per day andworks as an attorney. His physical examination is notableonly for a new systolic heart murmur heard best in themitral region. His laboratory examination is notable formild anemia, an elevated white blood cell count, and oc-casional red blood cells on clean catch urine. Blood cul-tures grow Streptococcus bovis  and echocardiogram shows
a <1-cm vegetation on the mitral valve. What additionalevaluation is indicated for this patient?
A. Colonoscopy
B. Head CT scanC. Pulmonary embolism protocol CT scan D. Renal biopsyE. T oxicology screen
III-13.    A 58-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room complaining of jaundice. She ﬁrst noticed a yellowishdiscoloration of her skin about 3 days ago. It has becomeprogressively worse since that time. In association with thedevelopment of jaundice, she also has noticed clay-coloredstools and pruritus. There has been no associated abdomi-nal pain, fever, chills, or night sweats. She has a past medi-cal history of alcohol abuse, but has been abstinent for thepast 10 years. She has no known history of cirrhosis. Onphysical examination, she is afebrile with normal vitalsigns. She is jaundiced. The bowel sounds are normal. Theabdomen is soft and nontender. There is no distention. Theliver span is 12 cm to percussion and is palpable at the rightcostal margin. The spleen tip is not palpable. Liver functiontesting reveals an AST of 122 IU/L, ALT of 168 IU/L, alka-line phosphatase of 483 U/L, total bilirubin of 22.1 mg/dL,and direct bilirubin of 19.2 mg/dL. On right upper quad-rant ultrasound, the gallbladder cannot be visualized, andthere is dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts but not thecommon bile duct. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Cholangiocarcinoma
B. CholecystitisC. Gallbladder cancerD. Hepatocellular carcinomaE. Pancreatic cancer
III-14.   An 81-year-old male is admitted to the hospital for
altered mental status. He was found at home, confusedand lethargic, by his son. His past medical history is signif-icant for metastatic prostate cancer. The patient’s medica-tions include periodic intramuscular goserelin injections.On examination he is afebrile. Blood pressure is 110/50mmHg, and the pulse rate is 110 beats/min. He is lethargicand minimally responsive to sternal rub. He has bitempo-ral wasting, and his mucous membranes are dry. On neu-rologic examination he is obtunded. The patient has anintact gag reﬂex and withdraws to pain in all four extremi-ties. Rectal tone is normal. Laboratory values are signiﬁ-cant for a creatinine of 4.2 mg/dL, a calcium level of 12.4meq/L, and an albumin of 2.6 g/dL. All the following areappropriate initial management steps exceptIII-12. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 57
A. normal saline
B. pamidronateC. furosemide when the patient is euvolemicD. calcitoninE. dexamethasone
III-15.   Which of the following statements describes the re-
lationship between testicular tumors and serum markers?
A. Pure seminomas produce α fetoprotein (AFP) or
beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) in
more than 90% of cases.
B. More than 40% of nonseminomatous germ cell tu-
mors produce no cell markers.
C. Both β-hCG and AFP should be measured in fol-
lowing the progress of a tumor.
D. Measurement of tumor markers the day after sur-
gery for localized disease is useful in determiningcompleteness of the resection.
E. β-hCG is limited in its usefulness as a marker be-cause it is identical to human luteinizing hormone.
III-16.   A woman with advanced breast cancer being treated
with tamoxifen presents to the emergency departmentwith nausea and vomiting. She has been tolerating hertreatment well but in the last 3 days noticed nausea, vom-iting, and abdominal pain. Her symptoms are not relatedto food intake, and she is having normal bowel move-ments. She has no fevers or rashes. Her medications in-clude tamoxifen, alendronate, megestrol acetate, and amultivitamin. Abdominal examination reveals very mildtenderness diffusely, and there is no rebound tenderness.Bowel sounds are normal. Plain radiographs and a CTscan of the abdomen are unremarkable. Laboratory anal-ysis reveals a normal white blood cell count. Sodium is130 meq/L, potassium 4.9 meq/L, chloride 99 meq/L, bi-carbonate 29 meq/L, BUN 15 mg/dL, creatinine 0.7 mg/dL. What is the next most appropriate step in this pa-tient’s management?
A. Antiemetics prn
B. LaparoscopyC. Serum cortisolD. Small-bowel follow throughE. Upper endoscopy
III-17.    A healthy 62-year-old woman returns to your clinic
after undergoing routine colonoscopy. Findings includedtwo 1.3-cm sessile (ﬂat-based), villous adenomas in herascending colon that were removed during the procedure.What is the next step in management?
A. Colonoscopy in 3 months
B. Colonoscopy in 3 yearsC. Colonoscopy in 10 yearsD. CT scan of the abdomenE. Partial colectomyF. ReassuranceIII-18.    Which of the following statements regarding poly-
cythemia vera is correct?
A. An elevated plasma erythropoietin level excludes the
diagnosis.
B. Transformation to acute leukemia is common.
C. Thrombocytosis correlates strongly with throm-
botic risk.
D. Aspirin should be prescribed to all these patients to
reduce thrombotic risk.
E. Phlebotomy is used only after hydroxyurea and in-
terferon have been tried.
III-19.    A 52-year-old female is evaluated for abdominal
swelling with a computed tomogram that shows ascitesand likely peritoneal studding of tumor but no other ab-normality. Paracentesis shows adenocarcinoma but can-not be further differentiated by the pathologist. Athorough physical examination, including breast and pel-vic examination, shows no abnormality. CA-125 levelsare elevated. Pelvic ultrasound and mammography arenormal. Which of the following statements is true?
A. Compared with other women with known ovarian
cancer at a similar stage, this patient can be expected
to have a less than average survival.
B. Debulking surgery is indicated.C. Surgical debulking plus cisplatin and paclitaxel is in-
dicated.
D. Bilateral mastectomy and bilateral oophorectomy
will improve survival.
E. Fewer than 1% of patients with this disorder will re-
main disease-free 2 years after treatment.
III-20.    A 34-year-old female with a past medical history of
sickle cell anemia presents with a 5-day history of fatigue,lethargy, and shortness of breath. She denies chest pain orbone pain. She has had no recent travel. Of note, the pa-tient’s 4-year-old daughter had a “cold” 2 weeks beforethe presentation. On examination she has pale conjunc-tiva, is anicteric, and is mildly tachycardic. Abdominalexamination is unremarkable. Laboratories show ahemoglobin of 3 g/dL; her baseline is 8 g/dL. The whiteblood cell count and platelets are normal. Reticulocytecount is undetectable. T otal bilirubin is 1.4 mg/dL. Lacticdehydrogenase is at the upper limits of the normal range.Peripheral blood smear shows a few sickled cells but a to-tal absence of reticulocytes. The patient is given a transfu-sion of 2 units of packed red blood cells and admitted tothe hospital. A bone marrow biopsy shows a normal mye-loid series but an absence of erythroid precursors. Cyto-genetics are normal. What is the most appropriate nextmanagement step?
A. Make arrangements for exchange transfusion.
B. Tissue type her siblings for a possible bone marrow
transplant.
C. Check parvovirus titers.III-14. (Continued)
58 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
D. Start prednisone and cyclosporine.
E. Start broad-spectrum antibiotics.
III-21.    A 22-year-old pregnant woman of northern Euro-
pean descent presents 3 months into her ﬁrst pregnancywith extreme fatigue, pallor, and icterus. She reports be-ing previously healthy. On evaluation her hemoglobin is 8g/dL, reticulocyte count is 9%, indirect bilirubin is 4.9mg/dL, and serum haptoglobin is not detectable. Herphysical examination is notable for splenomegaly and anormal 3-month uterus. Peripheral smear is shown be-low. What is the most likely diagnosis? (See Figure III-21,
Color Atlas.)
A. Colonic polyp
B. G6PD deﬁciencyC. Hereditary spherocytosisD. Parvovirus B19 infectionE. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
III-22.    A patient with acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL) is
admitted with respiratory distress and chest pain. The pa-tient reports 1 day of shortness of breath not associatedwith cough. There have been no sick contacts, and beforethe onset of the respiratory symptoms, the patient onlyrecalls fatigue. A chest radiograph shows faint diffuse in-terstitial inﬁltrates without pulmonary edema. The car-diac silhouette is normal. An arterial blood gas shows aPa
O2 = 54 mmHg, while the pulse oximetry is 97% on
room air. A carbon monoxide level is normal. All of thefollowing laboratory abnormalities are expected in thispatient except
A. bcr-abl mutationB. blast count >100,000/ µL
C. elevated lactate dehydrogenase levelsD. increased blood viscosityE. methemoglobinemia
III-23.    A 48-year-old male is referred for evaluation by an
acute care center because of a nodule on chest radiography.Three weeks ago he was diagnosed with pneumonia afterreporting 3 days of fever, cough, and sputum production.The chest radiogram showed a small right lower lobe alve-olar inﬁltrate and a left upper lobe 1.5-cm round nodule.He was treated with antibiotics and is now asymptomatic.A repeat chest radiogram shows that the right lower lobepneumonia is resolved, but the nodule is still present. He isasymptomatic. He smoked one pack of cigarettes per dayfor 25 years and quit 3 years ago. He never had a prior chestradiogram. CT scan shows that the nodule is 1.5 by 1.7 cmand is located centrally in the left upper lobe, has no calciﬁ-cation, and has slightly scalloped edges. There is no medi-astinal adenopathy or pleural effusion. Which of thefollowing is the appropriate next step in his management?
A. Bronchoscopy
B. MediastinoscopyC. MRI scanD.
18FDG PET scan
E. Repeat chest CT in 6 months
III-24.   All the following types of cancer commonly metas-
tasize to the central nervous system (CNS) except
A. ovarianB. breastC. hypernephromaD. melanomaE. acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
III-25.   A 54-year-old woman with atrial ﬁbrillation is antico-
agulated with warfarin, 5 mg daily. She developed a urinarytract infection that her primary care physician has treatedwith ciproﬂoxacin, 250 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. Shepresents to the emergency room today complaining ofblood in her urine and easy bruising. Her physical exami-nation shows ecchymoses on her arms. Her urine is bloodyin appearance, but no clots are present. After ﬂushing thebladder with 100 mL of sterile saline, the urine returnswith a slight pink hue only. A urinalysis shows 3–5 whiteblood cells per high power ﬁeld and many red blood cellsper high power ﬁeld. There are no bacteria present. The in-ternational normalized ratio (INR) is 7.0. What is the bestapproach to treatment of this patient’s coagulopathy?
A. Administer vitamin K 10 mg IV .
B. Administer vitamin K 2 mg SC.C. Administer vitamin K 1 mg sublingually.D. Hold further warfarin doses until the INR falls to 2.0.E. Transfuse four units of fresh-frozen plasma.
III-26.   Which of the following statements about cardiac
toxicity from cancer treatment is true?
A. Doxorubicin-based cardiac toxicity is idiosyncratic
and dose-independent.
B. Anthracycline-induced congestive heart failure is re-
versible with time and control of risk factors.
C. Mediastinal irradiation often results in acute peri-
carditis during the ﬁrst few weeks of treatment.
D. Chronic constrictive pericarditis often manifests
symptomatically up to 10 years after treatment.
E. The incidence of coronary atherosclerosis in pa-
tients who have a history of mediastinal irradiation
is the same as that in age-matched controls.
III-27.   A 23-year-old woman is diagnosed with a lower ex-
tremity deep venous thrombosis. Which of the followingmedical conditions represents a contraindication to ther-apy with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH)?
A. Pregnancy
B. ObesityC. Dialysis-dependent renal failureD. Uncontrolled diabetes mellitusE. JaundiceIII-23. (Continued) III-20. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 59
III-28.   Which of the following pairs of chemotherapy and
complication is incorrect?
A. Daunorubicin—CHF
B. Bleomycin—interstitial ﬁbrosisC. Cyclophosphamide—hematuriaD. Cisplatin—liver failureE. Ifosfamide—Fanconi syndrome
III-29.   A 70-year-old man is admitted to the cardiac care
unit for complaints of chest pressure occurring at rest ra-diating to his left arm with associated diaphoresis and pre-syncope. His admission electrocardiogram (ECG) showedST depressions in V4–V6. The chest pain and ECGchanges resolve with sublingual nitroglycerin. He istreated with IV heparin, aspirin, metoprolol, and lisino-pril. His cardiac catheterization shows 90% occlusion ofthe left anterior descending artery, 80% occlusion of thedistal circumﬂex artery, and 99% occlusion of the rightcoronary artery. He remains in the cardiac care unit await-ing coronary artery bypass. He has a history of rheumaticheart disease and underwent mechanical mitral valve re-placement at age 58. On admission, his hemoglobin is 12.2g/dL, hematocrit 37.1%, white blood cell (WBC) count9800/µL, and platelet count 240,000/µL. His creatinine is1.7 mg/dL. On the fourth hospital day, his hemoglobin is10.0, hematocrit 31%, WBC count 7600/µL, and plateletcount 112,000/µL. His creatinine has risen to 2.9 mg/dLafter the cardiac catheterization. What is the most appro-priate treatment of the patient at this time?
A. Continue heparin and give a platelet transfusion.
B. Discontinue heparin infusion and start argatroban.C. Discontinue heparin and start lepirudin.D. Discontinue heparin and start warfarin.E. Send serum to assess for the presence of heparin–
platelet factor 4 (PF4) IgG antibody and continueheparin.
III-30.    A 24-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room complaining of a red, tender rash that has beenspreading across her arms and legs over the past 2 days. Shealso describes severe diffuse muscle pain that has worsenedover a week’s time. She woke up feeling as though she couldnot catch her breath and has developed a dry cough overthe past several days. She is without any signiﬁcant medicalhistory but recalls that she had similar symptoms severalyears ago, and was told she was having an allergic reaction.Her symptoms abated with an oral glucocorticoid taper.She takes no prescription medications but takes a numberof over-the-counter nutritional supplements daily. She can-not describe any allergic trigger to her previous episode orher current one. Her family history is unremarkable, andher close contacts are not ill. She works in an ofﬁce, has nopets, and has not travelled internationally. Her laboratoryresults are remarkable for a leukocyte count of 12,100 cells/µL and a total eosinophil count of 1100/ µL. Which of the
following is the most likely cause of her symptoms?A. Early stage of systemic lupus erythematosusB. Gluten allergyC. Ingestion of 
L-tryptophan
D. Lactose intoleranceE. Recent viral upper respiratory tract infection
III-31.    A woman wants your advice regarding Papanicolaou
smears. She is 36 years old and is monogamous with herhusband since they were married 3 years ago. She has hadnormal Pap smears every year for the past 6 years. Shewould like to avoid the yearly test. What is your advice tothis patient, based on the current screening guidelines?
A. She may discontinue screening at age 50 if she has had
normal yearly Pap smears for the previous 10 years.
B. She may extend the screening interval to once every
2–3 years.
C. She may extend the screening interval to once every
5 years if she agrees to use barrier protection.
D. She may discontinue Pap screening if she receives
the human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccine.
E. The only indication to cease Pap testing is if she
were to have a total hysterectomy.
III-32.    The evaluation in a newly diagnosed case of acute
lymphoid leukemia (ALL) should routinely include all of
the following except
A. bone marrow biopsyB. cell-surface phenotypingC. complete metabolic panelD. cytogenetic testingE. lumbar punctureF. plasma viscosity
III-33.    Which of the following statements about lead-time
bias occurrence is true?
A. A test does not inﬂuence the natural history of the dis-
ease; patients are merely diagnosed at an earlier date.
B. Slow-growing, less aggressive cancers are detected
during screening; aggressive cancers are not detected
by screening, due to death.
C. Screening identiﬁes abnormalities that would never
have caused a problem during a person’s lifetime.
D. The screened population differs signiﬁcantly from
the general population in that they are healthier.
E. A test detects disease at an earlier and more curable
stage of disease.
III-34.    Which of the following is sufﬁcient to make a deﬁn-
itive diagnosis of porphyria?
A. Appropriate clinical scenario including positive
family history
B. Evidence of an enzyme deﬁciency or gene defect
C. Laboratory measurements in blood indicating accu-
mulation of porphyrin precursorsIII-30. (Continued)
60 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
D. Laboratory measurements in urine indicating accumu-
lation of porphyrin precursors at the time of symptoms
E. Laboratory measurements in stool indicating accumu-
lation of porphyrin precursors at the time of symptoms
III-35.    All but which of the following statements about the
lupus anticoagulant (LA) are true?
A. Lupus anticoagulants typically prolong the aPTT.
B. A 1:1 mixing study will not correct in the presence
of lupus anticoagulants.
C. Bleeding episodes in patients with lupus anticoagu-
lants may be severe and life-threatening.
D. Female patients may experience recurrent midtri-
mester abortions.
E. Lupus anticoagulants may occur in the absence of
other signs of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
III-36.   The most common inherited prothrombotic disorder is
A. activated protein C resistanceB. prothrombin gene mutationC. protein C deﬁciencyD. protein S deﬁciencyE. antithrombin deﬁciency
III-37.    A 34-year-old woman presents for evaluation of left
lower extremity swelling and pain. She is obese and 8weeks postpartum. She recently traveled 6 h by airplaneto visit her parents with her infant. She has had no dysp-nea, palpitations, or syncope. She is currently on no med-ications except iron tablets. She is otherwise healthy. Hervitals signs are: heart rate 86 beats/min, blood pressure110/80 mm/Hg, temperature 37.0°C, and respiratory rate12 breaths/min. Her weight is 98 kg, and height is 170cm. The left lower extremity is swollen, tender, and warmto touch. A Homan’s sign is present, but there are no pal-pable cords. A lower extremity Doppler shows a throm-bosis in the common and superﬁcial femoral veins of theleft leg. Y ou are considering outpatient treatment withenoxaparin. All of the following statements regardinglow-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH) are true except
A. In patients with uncomplicated deep venous throm-
bosis (DVT), LMWH is a safe and effective alterna-tive to IV heparin and is associated with reducedhealth care costs compared to IV heparin.
B. LMWH can be safely used in pregnancy, but factor
Xa levels should be monitored to ensure adequateanticoagulation.
C. Monitoring of factor Xa levels is unnecessary in
most patients as there is a predictable dose-depen-dent anticoagulation effect.
D. There is a decrease in the risk of development of hep-
arin-induced thrombocytopenia with use of LMWH.
E. This patient’s recent pregnancy is a contraindication
to use of LMWH because there is a greater risk ofbleeding with LWMH compared to IV heparin.III-38.   A 65-year-old man is brought to the emergency room
by ambulance after his daughter found him to be incoher-ent earlier today. She last spoke with him yesterday, and atthat time, he was complaining of 2 days of myalgias, head-ache, and fever. He had attributed it to an upper respira-tory tract infection and did not seek evaluation from hisprimary care physician. T oday, he did not answer when shecalled his home, and she found him lying in his bed smell-ing of urine. He was minimally arousable but appeared tobe moving all of his extremities. His past medical history issigniﬁcant for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, andchronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He was evaluated2 weeks previously for a transient ischemic attack after anepisode where he had numbness and weakness of his leftarm and leg that resolved over 6 h without intervention.His current medications include aspirin, 81 mg daily, clo-pidogrel, 75 mg daily, atenolol, 100 mg daily, atorvastatin,20 mg daily, and tiotropium, once daily. He is allergic to lis-inopril, which caused angioedema. He is a former smokerand drinks alcohol rarely.
On physical examination, he is obtunded and minimally
arousable. He is febrile with a temperature of 38.9°C. Hisblood pressure is 159/96 mmHg, and heart rate is 98 beats/min. He is breathing at a rate of 24 breaths/min with a roomair oxygen saturation of 95%. He has minimal scleral ict-erus. The oropharynx reveals dry mucous membranes. Hiscardiovascular, pulmonary, and abdominal examinationsare normal. There are no rashes. His neurologic examina-tion is difﬁcult to obtain. There are no cranial nerve ﬁnd-ings. He resists movement of his extremities but has normalstrength. Deep tendon reﬂexes are brisk, 3+ and equal.
The laboratory values are as follows: hemoglobin 9.3 g/
dL, hematocrit 29.1%, white blood cell count 14,000/ µL,
and platelets 42,000/ µL. The differential demonstrates
83% neutrophils, 2% band forms, 6% lymphocytes, and9% monocytes. The sodium is 145 meq/L, potassium 3.8meq/L, chloride 113 meq/L, bicarbonate 19 meq/L, bloodurea nitrogen 68 mg/dL, and creatinine 3.4 mg/dL. Thebilirubin is 2.4 mg/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase is 450U/L. A peripheral blood smear shows diminished plate-lets and many schistocytes .What is the next most appro-
priate step in this patient’s care?
A. Discontinue clopidogrel.
B. Discontinue clopidogrel and initiate plasmapheresis.C. Initiate therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin.D. Obtain a head CT scan and initiate treatment with
factor VIIa, if subarachnoid hemorrhage is seen.
E. Perform a lumbar puncture and start broad-spectrum
antibiotic coverage with ceftazidime and vancomycin.
III-39.   A primary tumor of which of these organs is the
least likely  to metastasize to bone?
A. BreastB. ColonIII-34. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 61
C. Kidney
D. LungE. Prostate
III-40.    The triad of portal vein thrombosis, hemolysis, and
pancytopenia suggests which of the following diagnoses?
A. Acute promyelocytic leukemia
B. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)C. LeptospirosisD. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)E. Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura (TTP)
III-41.    A 68-year-old man seeks evaluation for fatigue,
weight loss, and early satiety that have been present forabout 4 months. On physical examination, his spleen isnoted to be markedly enlarged. It is ﬁrm to touch andcrosses the midline. The lower edge of the spleen reachesto the pelvis. His hemoglobin is 11.1 g/dL, and hemato-crit is 33.7%. The leukocyte count is 6200/ µL, and plate-
let count is 220,000/ µL. The white cell count differential
is 75% PMNs, 8% myelocytes, 4% metamyelocytes, 8%lymphocytes, 3% monocytes, and 2% eosinophils. Theperipheral blood smear shows teardrop cells, nucleatedred blood cells, and immature granulocytes. Rheumatoidfactor is positive. A bone marrow biopsy is attempted, butno cells are able to be aspirated. No evidence of leukemiaor lymphoma is found. What is the most likely cause ofthe splenomegaly?
A. Chronic idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis
B. Chronic myelogenous leukemiaC. Rheumatoid arthritisD. Systemic lupus erythematosusE. Tuberculosis
III-42.    The most common cause of high serum calcium in a
patient with a known cancer is
A. ectopic production of parathyroid hormone
B. direct destruction of bone by tumor cellsC. local production of tumor necrosis factor and IL-6
by bony metastasis
D. high levels of 1,25-hydroxyvitamin DE. production of parathyroid hormone–like substance
III-43.    A 72-year-old man with chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease and stable coronary disease presents to theemergency room with several days of worsening produc-tive cough, fevers, malaise, and diffuse muscle aches. Achest x-ray demonstrates a new lobar inﬁltrate. Labora-tory measurements reveal a total white blood cell count of12,100 cells/µL, with a neutrophilic predominance of86% and 8% band forms. He is diagnosed with commu-nity-acquired pneumonia, and antibiotic treatment is ini-tiated. Under normal, or “nonstress,” conditions, whatpercentage of the total body neutrophils are present in thecirculation?A. 2%B. 10%C. 25%D. 40%E. 90%
III-44.    All of the following laboratory values are consistent
with an intravascular hemolytic anemia except
A. increased haptoglobinB. increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)C. increased reticulocyte countD. increased unconjugated bilirubinE. increased urine hemosiderin
III-45.    All the following match the anticoagulant with its
correct mechanism of action except
A. abciximab—GpIIb/IIIa receptor inhibitionB. clopidogrel—inhibition of thromboxane A
2 release
C. fondaparinux—inhibition of factor XaD. argatroban—thrombin inhibitionE. warfarin—vitamin K—dependent carboxylation of
coagulation factors
III-46.    All the following are late complications of bone
marrow transplant preparative regimens except
A. growth retardationB. azoospermiaC. hypothyroidismD. cataractsE. dementia
III-47.    Which of the following best describes the mecha-
nism of action of clopidogrel?
A. Activates antithrombin and inhibits clotting enzymes
B. Binds to the activated GPIIb/IIIa receptor on the
platelet surface to block binding of adhesive molecules
C. Inhibits cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) on platelets to
decrease production of thromboxane A
2
D. Inhibits phosphodiesterase to block the breakdown
of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) to in-hibit platelet activation
E. Irreversibly blocks P2Y
12 to prevent adenosine
diphosphate (ADP)–induced platelet aggregation
III-48.    A 45-year-old man is evaluated by his primary care
physician for complaints of early satiety and weight loss.On physical examination, his spleen is palpable 10 cm be-low the left costal margin and is mildly tender to palpa-tion. His laboratory studies show a leukocyte count of125,000/ µL with a differential of 80% neutrophils, 9%
bands, 3% myelocytes, 3% metamyelocytes, 1% blasts,1% lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 1% basophils. He-moglobin is 8.4 g/dL, hematocrit 26.8%, and plateletcount 668,000/ µL. A bone marrow biopsy demonstrates
increased cellularity with an increased myeloid to eryth-III-39. (Continued) III-43. (Continued)
62 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
roid ratio. Which of the following cytogenetic abnormali-
ties is most likely to be found in this patient?
A. Deletion of a portion of the long arm of chromo-
some 5, del(5q)
B. Inversion of chromosome 16, inv(16)
C. Reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9
and 22 (Philadelphia chromosome)
D. Translocations of the long arms of chromosomes 15
and 17
E. Trisomy 12
III-49.    A 35-year-old patient comes into your ofﬁce with
persistent iron deﬁciency anemia. His past medical his-tory is signiﬁcant for end-stage renal disease on hemo-dialysis, hypertension, and rheumatoid arthritis. Hismedications include calcium acetate, a multivitamin, ni-fedipine, aspirin, iron sulfate, and omeprazole. His he-moglobin 6 months ago was 8 mg/dL. One week ago, itwas 7.9 mg/dL. His ferritin is 8 mg/dL. He reports nobright red blood per rectum, and his stool guaiac exami-nations have been repeatedly negative over the past 6months. What is the most likely cause of this patient’siron deﬁciency anemia?
A. Celiac sprue
B. Colon cancerC. HemorrhoidsD. Medication effectE. Peptic ulcer disease
III-50.    A 32-year-old male presents complaining of a testicu-
lar mass. On examination you palpate a 1-by 2-cm painlessmass on the surface of the left testicle. A chest x-ray showsno lesions, and a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showsno evidence of retroperitoneal adenopathy. The α fetopro-
tein (AFP) level is elevated at 400 ng/mL. Beta humanchorionic gonadotropin ( β-hCG) is normal, as is LDH.
Y ou send the patient for an orchiectomy. The pathologycomes back as seminoma limited to the testis alone. TheAFP level declines to normal at an appropriate interval.What is the appropriate management at this point?
A. Radiation to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes
B. Adjuvant chemotherapyC. Hormonal therapyD. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND)E. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
III-51.    All of the following statements regarding tobacco
usage and cessation are correct except
A. Most Americans who quit do so on their own with-
out involvement in an organized cessation program.
B. Over 80% of adult Americans who smoke began be-
fore the age of 18.
C. Smokeless tobacco is associated with gum and den-
tal disease, not cancer.D. T obacco cessation messages and programs are more
effective for light smokers than for heavy smokers.
E. T obacco use is the most modiﬁable cancer risk factor.
III-52.   A 29-year-old male is found on routine chest radi-
ography for life insurance to have right hilar adenopathy.He is otherwise healthy. Besides biopsy of the lymphnodes, which of the following is indicated?
A. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level
B. β-hCG
C. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)D. PSAE. C-reactive protein
III-53.   Which of the following is correct regarding small-cell
lung cancer compared with non-small cell lung cancer?
A. Small-cell lung cancer is more radiosensitive.
B. Small-cell lung cancer is less chemosensitive.C. Small-cell lung cancer is more likely to present pe-
ripherally in the lung.
D. Small-cell lung cancer is derived from an alveolar cell.E. Bone marrow involvement is more common in non-
small cell lung cancer.
III-54.   Which of the following statements regarding esoph-
ageal cancer is true?
A. Cigarette smoking and heavy alcohol intake are syn-
ergistic risk factors for adenocarcinoma.
B. Chronic gastric reﬂux is a risk factor for develop-
ment of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
C. Esophageal cancer is most common in the middle
third of the esophagus.
D. Incidence of squamous cell carcinoma has decreased
over the past 30 years while adenocarcinoma contin-
ues to increase.
E. The prognosis for patients with adenocarcinoma is
consistently better than for those with squamouscell carcinoma.
F. All of the above are true.
III-55.   All the following conditions are associated with an
increased incidence of cancer except
A. Down’s syndromeB. Fanconi’s anemiaC. Von Hippel–Lindau syndromeD. neuroﬁbromatosisE. fragile X syndrome
III-56.    A 50-year-old female presents to your clinic for
evaluation of an elevated platelet count. The latest com-plete blood count is white blood cells (WBC) 7,000/mm
3,
hematocrit 34%, and platelets 600,000/mm3. All the fol-
lowing are common causes of thrombocytosis except
A. iron-deﬁciency anemiaIII-51. (Continued) III-48. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 63
B. essential thrombocytosis
C. chronic myeloid leukemiaD. myelodysplasiaE. pernicious anemia
III-57.    A 76-year-old man presents to an urgent care
clinic with pain in his left leg for 4 days. He also de-scribes swelling in his left ankle, which has made it difﬁ-cult for him to ambulate. He is an active smoker and hasa medical history remarkable for gastroesophageal re-ﬂux disease, prior deep venous thrombosis (DVT) 9months ago that resolved, and well-controlled hyperten-sion. Physical examination is revealing for 2+ edema inhis left ankle. A 
D-dimer is ordered and is elevated.
Which of the following makes  D-dimer less predictive of
DVT in this patient?
A. Age >70
B. History of active tobacco useC. Lack of suggestive clinical symptomsD. Negative Homan’s sign on examinationE. Previous DVT in the past year
III-58.    A patient with longstanding HIV infection, alcohol-
ism, and asthma is seen in the emergency room for 1–2days of severe wheezing. He has not been taking any med-icines for months. He is admitted to the hospital andtreated with nebulized therapy and systemic glucocorti-coids. His CD4 count is 8 and viral load is >750,000. Histotal white blood cell (WBC) count is 3200 cells /µL with90% neutrophils. He is accepted into an inpatient sub-stance abuse rehabilitation program and before dischargeis started on opportunistic infection prophylaxis, bron-chodilators, a prednisone taper over 2 weeks, ranitidine,and highly-active antiretroviral therapy. The rehabilita-tion center pages you 2 weeks later; a routine laboratorycheck reveals a total WBC count of 900 cells/ µL with 5%
neutrophils. Which of the following new drugs wouldmost likely explain this patient’s neutropenia?
A. Darunavir
B. EfavirenzC. RanitidineD. PrednisoneE. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
III-59.    Which of the following symptoms is most suggestive
of an esophageal mass?
A. Early satiety
B. Liquid phase dysphagia onlyC. Odynophagia with chest painD. Oropharyngeal dysphagiaE. Solid phase dysphagia progressing to liquid phase
dysphagia
III-60.    All of the following have been associated with devel-
opment of a lymphoid malignancy exceptA. celiac sprueB. Helicobacter pylori  infection
C. hepatitis B infectionD. HIV infectionE. human herpes virus 8 (HHV8) infectionF. inherited immunodeﬁciency syndromes
III-61.    A 31-year-old female is referred to your clinic for an
evaluation of anemia. She describes a 2-month history offatigue. She denies abdominal pain but notes that her ab-domen has become slightly more distended in recentweeks. Past medical history is otherwise unremarkable.The patient’s parents are alive, and she has three healthysiblings. Physical examination is signiﬁcant for pale con-junctiva and a palpable spleen 4 cm below the left costalmargin. Hematocrit is 31% and bilirubin is normal. Thereticulocyte percentage is low. Haptoglobin and lactic de-hydrogenase (LDH) are normal. A peripheral blood smearshows numerous teardrop-shaped red cells, nucleated redcells, and occasional myelocytes. A bone marrow aspirateis unsuccessful, but a biopsy shows a hypercellular marrowwith trilineage hyperplasia and ﬁndings consistent withthe presumed diagnosis of chronic idiopathic myeloﬁbro-sis. Y ou transfuse her to a hematocrit of 40%. What is themost appropriate next management step?
A. Administer erythropoietin.
B. Follow up in 6 months.C. Institute combined-modality chemotherapy.D. Perform HLA matching of her siblings.E. Perform a splenectomy.
III-62.    All the following are suggestive of iron deﬁciency
anemia except
A. koilonychiaB. picaC. decreased serum ferritinD. decreased total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)E. low reticulocyte response
III-63.    Which source of stem cell is incorrectly  paired with
the challenge associated with their clinical application?
A. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells: Transplanted
cells may not differentiate into the desired cell type
B. Embryonic stem cells: High potential to form ter-
atomas
C. Organ-speciﬁc multipotent stem cells: Difﬁcult to
isolate from tissues other than bone marrow
D. Umbilical cord blood stem cells: Graft-versus-host
disease
III-64.    Y ou are seeing a patient in follow-up in whom you
have begun an evaluation for an elevated hematocrit. Y ou
suspect polycythemia vera based on a history of aquagenicpruritus and splenomegaly. Which set of laboratory testsare consistent with the diagnosis of polycythemia vera?III-60. (Continued) III-56. (Continued)
64 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
A. Elevated red blood cell mass, high serum erythro-
poietin levels, normal oxygen saturation
B. Elevated red blood cell mass, low serum erythropoi-
etin levels, normal oxygen saturation
C. Normal red blood cell mass, high serum erythropoi-
etin levels, low arterial oxygen saturation
D. Normal red blood cell mass, low serum erythropoie-
tin levels, low arterial oxygen saturation
III-65.    A 59-year-old man is admitted with a painful, blister-
ing rash on the dorsal aspects of both hands. He has a med-
ical history of alcoholism and admits to a recent relapseand has been drinking heavily over the past week. He is ad-mitted and stabilized. A diagnosis of porphyria cutaneatarda (PCT) is made based on increased circulating por-phyrins in the blood and decreased URO-decarboxylaseactivity. He is discharged to a rehabilitation facility and fol-lows up in your clinic 2 weeks later. He has been abstinentfrom alcohol but his rash has persisted, and now he alsohas some blistering on the legs and feet. Which of the fol-lowing treatment modalities is most appropriate?
A. Hydroxyurea
B. IV iron infusion weekly while following serum iron
levels
C. Oral iron plus vitamin CD. The rash of PCT can take months to resolve; the pa-
tient should continue to abstain from alcohol and befollowed closely
E. Weekly phlebotomy until ferritin normalizes
III-66.    Which of the following hemolytic anemias can be
classiﬁed as extracorpuscular?
A. Elliptocytosis
B. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuriaC. Pyruvate kinase deﬁciencyD. Sickle cell anemiaE. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
III-67.    All of the following are obstacles to the more wide-
spread application of stem cells for regenerative medicineexcept
A. controlling the migration of transplanted stem cells
B. identifying diseases suitable for stem cell based ther-
apies
C. identifying the pathways for differentiating stem
cells into speciﬁc cell types
D. overcoming ethical concerns over their harvest and useE. predicting the response of cells to the environment
of the diseased organ
III-68.    Y ou are asked to consult on a 34-year-old male with
thrombocytopenia. He sustained a motor vehicle colli-sion 10 days ago, resulting in shock, internal bleeding,and acute renal failure. An exploratory laparotomy wasperformed that showed a ruptured spleen requiring asplenectomy. He also underwent an open reduction andinternal ﬁxation of the left femur. The platelet count was260,000 cells/ µL on admission. T oday it is 68,000 cells/ µL.
His medications are oxacillin, morphine, and subcutane-ous heparin. On examination the vital signs are stable.The examination is signiﬁcant for an abdominal scar thatis clean and healing. The patient’s left leg is in a large castand is elevated. The right leg is swollen from the calfdownward. Ultrasound of the right leg shows a deepvenous thrombosis. Antiheparin antibodies are positive.Creatinine is 3.2 mg/dL. What is the most appropriatenext management step?
A. Discontinue heparin.
B. Stop heparin and start enoxaparin.C. Stop heparin and start argatroban.D. Stop heparin and start lepirudin.E. Observe the patient.
III-69.    A 64-year-old man with chronic lymphoid leukemia
(CLL) and chronic hepatitis C presents for his yearly fol-low-up. His white blood cell count is stable at 83000/ µL,
but his hematocrit has dropped from 35% to 26% and hisplatelet count also dropped from 178,000/ µL to 69,000/
µL. His initial evaluation should include all of the follow-ingexcept
A. AST, ALT, and prothrombin timeB. bone marrow biopsyC. Coomb’s testD. peripheral blood smearE. physical examination
III-70.    A 64-year-old man with Child-Pugh class B cirrho-
sis presents to his gastroenterologist complaining ofweight loss and a feeling of abdominal fullness. He wasdiagnosed with hepatitis C cirrhosis 5 years previously. Itis thought that the patient developed with hepatitis C fol-lowing a blood transfusion 20 years ago after a car acci-dent. His initial presentation with cirrhosis was volumeoverload and ascites. He has been successfully managedwith sodium restriction, spironolactone, and furosemide.He has no other signiﬁcant medical history. On examina-tion today, his liver is enlarged and ﬁrm. No ascites ispresent. A helical CT of the abdomen shows a single tu-mor in the right lobe of the liver measuring 4 cm in diam-eter. The location of the mass is near the main portalpedicles. There is no evidence of vascular invasion ormetastatic lesions. The α fetoprotein level is 384 ng/mL.
Biopsy of the mass is diagnostic for hepatocellular carci-noma. What is the best approach for treatment?
A. Liver transplantation
B. Radiofrequency ablationC. Resection of the right hepatic lobeD. Systemic chemotherapyE. Transarterial chemoembolizationIII-68. (Continued) III-64. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 65
III-71.    Which of the following should prompt investigation
for hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer screening in a
32-year-old man?
A. Father, paternal aunt, and paternal cousin with co-
lon cancer with ages of diagnosis of 54, 68, and 37
years, respectively
B. Innumerable polyps visualized on routine colonoscopyC. Mucocutaneous pigmentationD. New diagnosis of ulcerative colitisE. None of the above
III-72.    Which of the following carries the best disease prog-
nosis with appropriate treatment?
A. Burkitt’s lymphoma
B. Diffuse large B cell lymphomaC. Follicular lymphomaD. Mantle cell lymphomaE. Nodular sclerosing Hodgkin’s disease
III-73.    Y ou are asked to consult on a 31-year-old male
with prolonged bleeding after an oral surgery proce-dure. He has no prior history of bleeding diathesis orfamily history of bleeding disorders. The patient’s pastmedical history is remarkable for infection with the hu-man immunodeﬁciency virus, with a CD4 count of 51/mL
3. The examination is remarkable only for spotty
lymphadenopathy. The platelet count is 230,000 cells/mL. His international normalized ratio (INR) is 1.5. Ac-tivated partial thromboplastin time is 40 s. Peripheralblood smear shows no schistocytes and is otherwise un-remarkable. A 1:1 mixing study corrects both conditionsimmediately and after a 2-h incubation. Fibrinogenlevel is normal. Thrombin time is prolonged. What isthe diagnosis?
A. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
B. DysﬁbrinogenemiaC. Factor V deﬁciencyD. Liver diseaseE. Factor XIII deﬁciency
III-74.    Chemoprevention strategies for cancer have met
with varying levels of success. Which of the followingpairings correctly identiﬁes an effective chemopreventionstrategy with its target effect?
A. Aspirin: colon cancer
B. β-Carotene: lung cancer
C. Calcium: adenomatous gastrointestinal polypsD. Isotretinoin: oral leukoplakiaE. Tamoxifen: endometrial cancer
III-75.    A 48-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital
with anemia and thrombocytopenia after complaining ofprofound fatigue. Her initial hemoglobin is 8.5 g/dL, he-matocrit 25.7%, and platelet count 42,000/ µL. Her leuko-
cyte count is 9540/ µL, but 8% blast forms are noted on
peripheral smear. A chromosomal analysis shows a recip-rocal translocation of the long arms of chromosomes 15and 17, t(15;17), and a diagnosis of acute promyelocyticleukemia is made. The induction regimen of this patientshould include which of the following drugs:
A. All-trans -retinoic acid (ATRA, or triretinoin)
B. Arsenic
C. Cyclophosphamide, daunorubicin, vinblastine, and
prednisone
D. RituximabE. Whole-body irradiation
III-76.    The patient above is started on the appropriate in-
duction regimen. Two weeks following initiation of treat-ment, the patient develops acute onset of shortness ofbreath, fever, and chest pain. Her chest radiograph showsbilateral alveolar inﬁltrates and moderate bilateral pleuraleffusions. Her leukocyte count is now 22,300/ µL, and she
has a neutrophil count of 78%, bands of 15%, and lym-phocytes 7%. She undergoes bronchoscopy with lavagethat shows no bacterial, fungal, or viral organisms. Whatis the most likely diagnosis in this patient?
A. Arsenic poisoning
B. Bacterial pneumoniaC. Cytomegalovirus pneumoniaD. Radiation pneumonitisE. Retinoic acid syndrome
III-77.    A 76-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with
complaints of fatigue for 4 months and fever for the past1 week. His temperature has been as high as 38.3°C athome. During this time, he intermittently has had a 5.5-kg weight loss, severe bruising with minimal trauma, andan aching sensation in his bones. He last saw his primarycare physician 2 months ago and was diagnosed with ane-mia of unclear etiology at that time. He has a history of aprevious left middle cerebral artery cerebrovascular acci-dent which has left him with decreased functional status.At baseline, he is able to ambulate in his home with theuse of a walker and is dependent upon a caregiver for as-sistance with his activities of daily living. His vital signsare: blood pressure 158/86 mmHg, heart rate 98 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, Sa
O2 95%, and tem-
perature 38°C. He appears cachectic with temporal mus-cle wasting. He has petechiae on his hard palate. He hasno lymph node enlargement. On cardiovascular exami-nation, there is a II/VI systolic ejection murmur present.His lungs are clear. The liver is enlarged and palpable 6cm below the right costal margin. In addition, the spleenis also enlarged, with a palpable spleen tip felt about 4 cmbelow the left costal margin. There are multiple hemato-mas and petechiae present in the extremities. Laboratoryexamination reveals the following: hemoglobin 5.1 g/dL,hematocrit 15%, platelets 12,000/ µL, and white blood cell
(WBC) count 168,000/ µL with 45% blast forms, 30%
neutrophils, 20% lymphocytes, and 5% monocytes. Re-III-75. (Continued)
66 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
view of the peripheral blood smear conﬁrms acute mye-
loid leukemia (M1 subtype, myeloblastic leukemia withoutmaturation) with complex chromosomal abnormalitieson cytogenetics. All of the following confer a poor prog-nosis for this patient except
A. advanced ageB. complex chromosomal abnormalities on cytogeneticsC. hemoglobin <7 g/dLD. prolonged interval between symptom onset and di-
agnosis
E. WBC count >100,000/ µL
III-78.    A new screening test for thyroid cancer has been in-
troduced into the population. In the ﬁrst year, 1000 posi-tive tests lead to correct identiﬁcation of thyroid cancer inthe screened population. Over the next year, 250 cases ofthyroid cancer are detected among those who initiallyhad a negative test. What is the sensitivity of this newscreening test?
A. 25%
B. 67%C. 80%D. Not enough information to calculate
III-79.    A 56-year-old patient inquires about screening for
colon cancer. He has no risk factors for colon cancer, otherthan age. Which of the following statements is true regard-ing which screening test you recommend for this patient?
A. 50% of patients with a positive fecal occult blood
testing have colon cancer.
B. One-time colonoscopy detects more advanced le-
sions than one-time fecal occult blood testing with
sigmoidoscopy.
C. Perforation rates for sigmoidoscopy and colonos-
copy are equivalent.
D. Sigmoidoscopy has not been shown to reduce
mortality.
E. Virtual colonoscopy is as effective as endoscopic
colonoscopy for detecting polyps <5 mm in size.
III-80.    A 65-year-old man seeks evaluation for nasal con-
gestion, headaches, and dysphagia, most notably when helies supine for sleeping. These symptoms have beenslowly worsening for the past month. He has no nasal dis-charge or fevers. On review of systems, he reports recenthoarseness and dizziness. His past medical history is sig-niﬁcant only for mild hypertension. He worked as a roof-ing contractor and smoked one pack/day of cigarettessince age 16. On physical examination, you note facialedema. His oropharynx is also mildly edematous, and thetonsils are unremarkable. His external and internal jugu-lar veins are engorged bilaterally, and there are prominentveins on the anterior chest. Chest percussion reveals dull-ness in the right base with decreased tactile fremitus. Achest radiograph shows a right upper lung mass that onbiopsy is consistent with non-small cell lung cancer. All ofthe following treatments may help this patient’s symp-toms except
A. chemotherapyB. diureticsC. glucocorticoidsD. radiation therapyE. venous stenting
III-81.    All of the following statements regarding the epide-
miology of and risk factors for acute myeloid leukemiasare true except
A. Anticancer drugs such as alkylating agents and
topoisomerase II inhibitors are the leading cause ofdrug-associated myeloid leukemias.
B. Individuals exposed to high-dose radiation are at
risk for acute myeloid leukemia whereas individualstreated with therapeutic radiation are not unlessthey are also treated with alkylating agents.
C. Men have a higher incidence of acute myeloid leuke-
mia than women.
D. The incidence of acute myeloid leukemia is greatest
in individuals <20 years.
E. Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) is associated with an
increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia.
III-82.    A 42-year-old man presented to the hospital with
right upper quadrant pain. He was found to have multi-ple masses in the liver that were found to be malignant onH&E staining of a biopsy sample. Y our initial history,physical examination and laboratory tests, includingprostate-speciﬁc antigen, are unrevealing. Lung, abdomi-nal, and pelvic CT scans are unremarkable. He is an oth-erwise healthy individual with no chronic medicalproblems. Which immunohistochemical markers shouldbe obtained from the biopsy tissue?
A. α Fetoprotein
B. Cytokeratin
C. Leukocyte common antigenD. ThyroglobulinE. Thyroid transcription factor 1
III-83.    A 56-year-old woman is diagnosed with chronic
myelogenous leukemia, Philadelphia chromosome–posi-tive. Her presenting leukocyte count was 127,000/ µL, and
her differential shows <2% circulating blasts. Her hemat-ocrit is 21.1% at diagnosis. She is asymptomatic exceptfor fatigue. She has no siblings. What is the best initialtherapy for this patient?
A. Allogeneic bone marrow transplant
B. Autologous stem cell transplantC. Imatinib mesylateD. Interferon- α
E. Leukapheresis.III-80. (Continued) III-77. (Continued)
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 67
III-84.    All the following are associated with a reduced life-
time risk of developing breast cancer except
A. absence of a history of maternal nursing
B. ﬁrst full-term pregnancy before age 18 yearsC. menarche after age 15 yearsD. natural menopause before age 42 yearsE. surgical menopause before age 42 years
III-85.    All the following cause prolongation of the activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) that does not correctwith a 1:1 mixture with pooled plasma except
A. lupus anticoagulantB. factor VIII inhibitorC. heparinD. factor VII inhibitorE. factor IX inhibitor
III-86.    A 53-year-old woman seeks evaluation from her
primary care physician regarding primary prevention ofcardiovascular disease and stroke. She has a past medi-cal history of type 2 diabetes mellitus for the past 5 yearswith a known hemoglobin A1C of 7.2%. She does nothave hypertension or known coronary artery disease.She has been obese throughout adulthood, and her BMIis 33.6 kg/m
2. She is currently perimenopausal with ir-
regular bleeding that last occurred 3 months ago. She istaking metformin, 1000 mg twice daily. She has been in-tolerant of ibuprofen in the past due to gastrointestinalupset. She previously smoked one pack of cigarettesdaily from the ages of 18 to 38. She drinks a glass ofwine with dinner. Her family history is signiﬁcant formyocardial infarction in her father at age 58, paternaluncle at age 67, and paternal grandmother at age 62. Onthe maternal side, her mother died of a stroke at age 62.She is concerned that she should be taking a daily aspi-rin as primary prevention of cardiovascular disease andstroke but is also concerned about potential side effects.Which of the following statements regarding aspirintherapy is true?
A. Aspirin is indicated for primary prevention of car-
diovascular disease because she has a strong family
history and has a history of diabetes mellitus.
B. Aspirin is only indicated for secondary prevention
of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease inwomen.
C. Because she is not postmenopausal, aspirin therapy
is not recommended as it will increase menstrualbleeding without signiﬁcantly decreasing the risk ofcardiovascular disease.
D. Her adverse reaction to ibuprofen prevents use of
aspirin because there is a high degree of cross-reac-tivity, and she is at risk for development of broncho-spasm with aspirin use.
E. The risk of major bleeding related to use of aspirin is
1–3% per year, but use of an enteric-coated or buff-ered aspirin will eliminate this risk.III-87.    A 22-year-old man comes into clinic because of a swol-
len leg. He does not remember any trauma to the leg, but thepain and swelling began 3 weeks ago in the anterior shin areaof his left foot. He is a college student and is active in sportsdaily. A radiograph of the right leg shows a destructive lesionwith a “moth-eaten” appearance extending into the soft tis-sue and a spiculated periosteal reaction. Codman’s triangle(a cuff of periosteal bone formation at the margin of thebone and soft tissue mass) is present. What is the most likelydiagnosis and optimal therapy for this lesion?
A. Chondrosarcoma; chemotherapy alone is curative
B. Chondrosarcoma; radiation with limited surgical
resection
C. Osteosarcoma; preoperative chemotherapy followed
by limb-sparing surgery
D. Osteosarcoma; radiation therapyE. Plasma cell tumor; chemotherapy
III-88.    Which of the following statements is true?
A. Factor VIII deﬁciency is characterized clinically by
bleeding into soft tissues, muscles, and weightbear-ing joints.
B. Congenital factor VIII deﬁciency is inherited in an
autosomal recessive fashion.
C. Factor VIII deﬁciency results in prolongation of the
prothrombin time.
D. Factor VIII complexes with Hageman factor, allow-
ing for a longer half-life.
E. Factor VIII has a half-life of nearly 24 h.
III-89.    All of the following statements regarding gastric car-
cinoma are true except
A. Linitis plastica is an inﬁltrative form of gastric lym-
phoma with no deﬁned margins that carries apoorer prognosis than intestinal-type lesions.
B. Reduction of tumor bulk with surgery is the best
therapeutic option for gastric adenocarcinoma, ifsurgically feasible.
C. The long-term ingestion of high concentrations of
nitrates in dried, smoked, or salted foods is associ-ated with higher rates of gastric cancer.
D. The presence of palpable, ﬁrm peri-umbilical nod-
ules is a poor prognostic sign.
E. Ulcerative lesions in the distal stomach should al-
ways undergo brush sampling and biopsy to rule outadenocarcinoma.
III-90.    Which of the following statements correctly de-
scribes characteristics of stem cells?
A. Ability to differentiate into a variety of mature cells
types
B. Capacity for self-renewal
C. Generate, maintain, and repair tissueD. A and CE. A and BF. All of the above
68 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
III-91.    Which of the following statements regarding malig-
nant spinal cord compression (MSCC) is true?
A. Less than 50% of patients who are treated while am-
bulatory will remain ambulatory.
B. Neurologic abnormalities on physical examination
are sufﬁcient to initiate high-dose glucocorticoids.
C. Neurologic ﬁndings often appear before pain.
D. Renal cell carcinoma is the most common cause of
MSCC.
E. The lumbosacral spine is the most commonly af-
fected site.
III-92.    All the following are characteristic of tumor lysis
syndrome except
A. hyperkalemiaB. hypercalcemiaC. lactic acidosisD. hyperphosphatemiaE. hyperuricemia
III-93.    A 22-year-old woman comes to the emergency de-
partment complaining of 12 h of shortness of breath.The symptoms began towards the end of a long car ridehome from college. She has no past medical history andher only medication is an oral contraceptive. Shesmokes occasionally but the frequency has increased re-cently because of examinations. On physical examina-tion, she is afebrile with respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, heart rate 110beats/min, Sa
O2 (room air) 92%. The rest of her physical
examination is normal. A chest radiograph and com-plete blood count are normal. Her serum pregnancy testis negative. Which of the following is the indicated man-agement strategy?
A. Check 
D-dimer and, if normal, discharge with non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory therapy.
B. Check D-dimer and, if normal, obtain lower extrem-
ity ultrasound.
C. Check D-dimer and, if abnormal, treat for deep
venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (DVT/PE).
D. Check D-dimer and, if abnormal, obtain contrast
multislice CT of chest.
E. Obtain contrast multislice CT of chest.
III-94.    The patient described above is found to have a
right pulmonary embolus. She is started on low-molec-
ular-weight heparin and warfarin. What is the goal in-ternational normalized ratio (INR) and the duration oftherapy?
A. INR 3.5; 1 month
B. INR 2.5; 3 monthsC. INR 3.5; 3 monthsD. INR 2.5; 6 monthsE. INR 3.5; 6 monthsF. INR 2.5; lifetimeIII-95.    A patient asks you about the utility of performing
monthly breast self-examination (BSE). Which of the fol-lowing statements is correct regarding the utility of andrecommendations regarding breast self-examination?
A. Breast self-examination reduces mortality only in
women who undergo breast biopsy.
B. Most screening societies recommend performing
BSE monthly for women >20 years.
C. Self-examination leads to increased biopsy rate.
D. Very few breast cancers are ﬁrst detected by patients.E. Breast self-examination leads to improved survival
from breast cancer.
III-96.    Which of the following tumor characteristics con-
fers a poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer?
A. Estrogen receptor-positive
B. Good nuclear gradeC. Low proportion of cells in S-phaseD. Overexpression of erbB2  (HER-2/neu )
E. Progesterone receptor-positive
III-97.    Which of the following serum laboratory tests is
most useful for predicting return of renal function in a pa-tient with tumor lysis syndrome and acute renal failure?
A. Creatinine
B. PhosphateC. PotassiumD. Serum pHE. Uric acid
III-98.    Fondaparinux may be used to treat all of the follow-
ing patients except
A. A 33-year-old woman weighing 48 kg presents with
a pulmonary embolus 2 months after a motor vehi-cle accident that resulted in a fractured femur.
B. A 46-year-old man with hypertension and focal seg-
mental glomerulosclerosis with a baseline creatinineof 3.3 mg/dL presents with a left lower extremitydeep venous thrombosis. He weighs 82 kg.
C. A 57-year-old woman had an aortic valve replace-
ment 7 days ago. The platelet count preoperativelywas 320,000/µL. On day 7, the platelet count is122,000/µL.
D. A 60-year-old man presents to the hospital with
chest pain and ST-segment depression in leads II,III, and aV
F on electrocardiogram. Troponin I level
is 2.32 ng/mL.
E. A 68-year-old man has undergone an uncompli-
cated right total hip replacement.
III-99.    A 26-year-old female who is 4 months pregnant is
seen for a standard evaluation. She reports feeling wellwith decreasing nausea over the last 1 month. The physi-cal examination is normal except for the presence of a1.5-cm hard nodule in the upper outer quadrant of theright breast. She does not recall the nodule being present
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 69
previously and has not performed self-examination since
be coming pregnant. Which of the following is the nextmost appropriate action?
A. Aspiration of the nodule
B. Mammogram after deliveryC. Prescription of oral progesterone therapyD. Recommendation of genetic testing for BRCA-1
E. Repeat physical examination after delivery
III-100.    Aplastic anemia has been associated with all of the
following except
A. carbamazepine therapyB. methimazole therapyC. non-steroidal inﬂammatory drugsD. parvovirus B19 infectionE. seronegative hepatitis
III-101.    A 23-year-old man presents with diffuse bruising.
He otherwise feels well. He takes no medications, doesnot use dietary supplements, and does not use illicitdrugs. His past medical history is negative for any priorillnesses. He is a college student and works as a barista ina coffee shop. A blood count reveals an absolute neutro-phil count of 780/ µL, hematocrit of 18% and platelet
count of 21,000/ µL. Bone marrow biopsy reveals hypocel-
lularity with a fatty marrow. Chromosome studies of pe-ripheral blood and bone marrow cells are performedwhich exclude Fanconi’s anemia and myelodysplastic syn-drome. The patient has a fully histocompatible brother.Which of the following is the best therapy?
A. Anti-thymocyte globulin plus cyclosporine
B. GlucocorticoidsC. Growth factorsD. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantE. Red blood cell and platelet transfusion
III-102.    A 46-year-old woman presents with new onset asci-
tes and severe abdominal pain: a hepatic Doppler examina-tion reveals hepatic vein thrombosis. She also reports teacolored urine on occasion, particularly in the morning, aswell as recurrent worsening abdominal pain. On furtherevaluation, she is found to have an undetectable serum hap-toglobin, elevated serum lactase dehydrogenase, hemoglobi-nuria and an elevated reticulocyte count. A peripheral smearshows no schistocytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Adenocarcinoma of the ovary
B. Antiphospholipid syndromeC. Aplastic anemiaD. Factor V Leiden deﬁciencyE. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
III-103.    A Sudanese refugee is brought to see you in clinic for
abdominal pain. He has had intermittent fevers for monthsand has lost considerable weight. He was previously a guardfor a refugee camp in the Sudan and worked the night shiftexclusively. On examination, he is severely malnourishedwith temporal wasting. He has massive splenomegaly butno palpable lymphadenopathy. Oropharynx shows nothrush. Laboratory data reveal an anemia, neutropenia, andthrombocytopenia. Skin examination shows no discrete le-sions but you and the patient notice that the skin appearsgray throughout. Malaria smears are negative and HIV test-ing is negative. Chest X-ray is normal. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Cirrhosis
B. Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis)C. Kaposi’s sarcomaD. Miliary tuberculosisE. Sickle cell anemia
III-104.    A 16-year-old male has recurrent thigh hematomas.
He has been active in sports all of his life and has had 3 ep-isodes of limb-threatening bleeding with compartmentsyndrome. A family history is notable for a maternalgrandfather with a similar bleeding history. Paternal familyhistory is not available. Laboratory analysis in clinic revealsa normal platelet count, a normal activated partial throm-boplastin time (22 s) and a prolonged prothrombin time(25 s). He takes no medications. What is the most likelyreason for his coagulation disorder?
A. Factor VIII deﬁciency
B. Factor VII deﬁciencyC. Factor IX deﬁciencyD. Prothrombin deﬁciencyE. Surreptitious warfarin ingestion
III-105.    A 52-year-old man is admitted with recurrent he-
marthroses of his knees. He is an electrician who is stillworking but over the last year has had recurrent hemar-throses requiring surgical evacuation. Before one yearago, he had no medical problems. He has no other pastmedical history and seldom sees a physician. He smokestobacco regularly. His platelet count is normal, erythro-cyte sedimentation rate is 55 mm/hr, hemoglobin is 9mg/dL and albumin is 3.1 mg/dL. Coagulation studiesshow a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time(aPTT) and a normal prothrombin time (PT). Addingplasma from a normal subject does not correct the aPTT.What is the cause of his recurrent hemarthroses?
A. Acquired inhibitor
B. Factor VIII deﬁciencyC. Factor IX deﬁciencyD. Secondary syphilisE. Vitamin C deﬁciency
III-106.    During a pre-employment physical and laboratory
evaluation, a 20-year-old male is noted to have a pro-longed activated prothromblastin time (aPTT). On re-view of systems, he denies a history of recurrent mucosalbleeding and has never had an issue with other majorIII-99. (Continued) III-103. (Continued)
70 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
bleeding. He has never had any major physical trauma. A
family history is limited because he does not know his bi-ologic family history. Mixing studies correct the aPTTwhen normal serum is used. Y ou suspect an inheritedhemorrhagic disease such as hemophilia. Which otherlaboratory abnormality would you most likely expect toﬁnd if this patient has hemophilia?
A. Low Factor VIII activity
B. Low factor IX activityC. Prolonged bleeding timeD. Prolonged prothrombin timeE. Prolonged thrombin time
III-107.    Y ou are evaluating a 45-year-old man with an
acute upper GI bleed in the emergency department. Hereports increasing abdominal girth over the past 3months associated with fatigue and anorexia. He has notnoticed any lower extremity edema. His past medical his-tory is signiﬁcant for hemophilia A diagnosed as a childwith recurrent elbow hemarthroses in the past. He hasbeen receiving infusions of factor VIII for most of his life,and received his last injection earlier that day. His bloodpressure is 85/45 mmHg with a heart rate of 115/min. Hisabdominal examination is tense with a positive ﬂuidwave. Hematocrit is 21%. Renal function and urinalysis isnormal. His aPTT is minimally prolonged, his INR is 2.7,platelets are normal. Which of the following is most likelyto yield a diagnosis for the cause of his GI bleeding?
A. Factor VIII activity level
B. H. pylori  antibody test
C. Hepatitis B surface antigenD. Hepatitis C RNAE. Mesenteric angiogram
III-108.    Y ou are managing a patient with suspected dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). The patient hasend-stage liver disease awaiting liver transplantation andwas recently in the intensive care unit with E. coli  bacterial
peritonitis. Y ou suspect DIC based on a new upper gastroin-testinal bleed in the setting of oozing from venipuncture sites.Platelet count is 43000/ µL, INR is 2.5, hemoglobin is 6 mg/dL
and
D-dimer is elevated to 4.5. What is the best way to distin-
guish between new-onset DIC and chronic liver disease?
A. Blood culture
B. Elevated ﬁbrinogen degradation productsC. Prolonged aPTTD. Reduced platelet countE. Serial laboratory analysis
III-109.    A 38-year-old woman is referred for evaluation of
an elevated hemoglobin and hematocrit that was discov-ered during an evaluation of recurrent headaches. Untilabout 8 months previously, she was in good health, butdeveloped increasingly persistent headaches with inter-mittent vertigo and tinnitus. She was originally pre-scribed sumatriptan for presumed migraine headaches,but did not experience relief of her symptoms. A CT scanof the brain showed no evidence of mass lesion. Duringevaluation of her headaches, she was found to have a he-moglobin of 17.3 g/dL, and a hematocrit of 52%. Heronly other symptom is diffuse itching after hot showers.She is a non-smoker. She has no history pulmonary orcardiac disease. On physical examination, she appearswell. Her BMI is 22.3 kg/m
2. Vitals signs are BP 148/84
mmHg, HR 86/min, RR 12/min, Sa O2 99% on room air.
She is afebrile. The physical examination including fullneurologic examination is normal. There are no heartmurmurs. There is no splenomegaly. Peripheral pulsesare normal. Laboratory studies conﬁrm elevated hemo-globin and hematocrit. She also has a platelet count of650,000/µL. Leukocyte count is 12,600/µL with a normal
differential. Which of the following tests should be per-formed next in the evaluation of this patient?
A. Bone marrow biopsy
B. Erythropoietin levelC. Genetic testing for JAK2 V617F mutationD. Leukocyte alkaline phosphataseE. Red cell mass and plasma volume determinationIII-108. (Continued) III-106. (Continued)
71III. ONCOLOGY AND HEMATOLOGY
ANSWERS
III-1. The answer is B.   (Chap. 94)   Bone pain resulting from metastatic lesions may be difﬁ-
cult to distinguish from degenerative disease, osteoporosis, or disk disease in the elderly.
Generally, these patients present with insidious worsening localized pain without feversor signs of infection. In contrast to pain related to disk disease, the pain of metastatic dis-ease is worse when the patient is lying down or at night. Neurologic symptoms related tometastatic disease constitute an emergency. Lung, breast, and prostate cancers accountfor approximately 80% of bone metastases. Thyroid carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma,lymphoma, and bladder carcinoma may also metastasize to bone. Metastatic lesions maybe lytic or blastic. Most cancers cause a combination of both, although prostate cancer ispredominantly blastic. Either lesion may cause hypercalcemia, although lytic lesionsmore commonly do this. Lytic lesions are best detected with plain radiography. Blastic le-sions are prominent on radionuclide bone scans. Treatment and prognosis depend on theunderlying malignancy. Bisphosphonates may reduce hypercalcemia, relieve pain, andlimit bone resorption.
III-2. The answer is B.   (Chap. 101)   Red blood cells utilize glutathione produced by the hex-
ose monophosphate shunt to compensate for increased production of reactive oxygenspecies (oxidant stress), usually induced by drugs or toxins. Defects in G6PD are the mostcommon congenital hexose monophosphate shunt defect. If the red blood cell (RBC) isunable to maintain an adequate level of glutathione during oxidant stress, hemoglobinprecipitates in the RBC, producing Heinz bodies. Because the G6PD gene is on the Xchromosome, almost all afﬂicted patients are males. G6PD deﬁciency is widely distrib-uted throughout regions that are currently or were once highly malarial endemic. It iscommon in males of African, African-American, Sardinian, and Sephardic descent. Inmost persons with G6PD deﬁciency, there is no evidence of symptomatic disease. How-ever, infection, ingestion of fava beans, or exposure to an oxidative agent (drug or toxin)can trigger an acute hemolytic event. Bite cells, Heinz bodies, and bizarre poikilocytesmay be evident on smear. The drugs that most commonly precipitate a G6PD crisis in-clude dapsone, sulfamethoxazole, primaquine, and nitrofurantoin. The anemia is oftensevere with rapid onset after drug ingestion, and renal failure can occur.
III-3. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 110 and 111)    Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin that plays an
essential role in hemostasis. It is absorbed in the small intestine and stored in the liver. Itserves as a cofactor in the enzymatic carboxylation of glutamic acid residues on pro-thrombin-complex proteins. The three major causes of vitamin K deﬁciency are poor di-etary intake, intestinal malabsorption, and liver disease. The prothrombin complexproteins (factors II, VII, IX, and X and protein C and protein S) all decrease with vitaminK deﬁciency. Factor VII and protein C have the shortest half-lives of these factors andtherefore decrease ﬁrst. Therefore, vitamin K deﬁciency manifests with prolongation ofthe prothrombin time ﬁrst. With severe deﬁciency, the aPTT will be prolonged as well.Factor VIII is not inﬂuenced by vitamin K.
III-4. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 110 and 111)   Hemophilia A results from a deﬁciency of factor
VIII. Replacement of factor VIII is the centerpiece of treatment. Cessation of aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is highly recommended. FFP contains pooledplasma from human sources. Cryoprecipitate refers to FFP that is cooled, resulting in the
72 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
precipitation of material at the bottom of the plasma. This product contains about half the
factor VIII activity of FFP in a tenth of the volume. Both agents are therefore reasonabletreatment options. DDA VP causes the release of a number of factors and von Willebrand fac-tor from the liver and endothelial cells. This may be useful for patients with mild hemophilia.Recombinant or puriﬁed factor VIII (i.e., Humate P) is indicated in patients with more se-vere bleeding. Therapy may be required for weeks, with levels of factor VIII kept at 50%, forpostsurgical or severe bleeding. Plasmapheresis has no role in the treatment of hemophilia A.
III-5. The answer is A.   (Chap. 88)   Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the common-
est cancers worldwide with the highest incidence in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Af-rica. However, the incidence of HCC in the United States is rapidly increasing and isthought to be related to an increase in the number of individuals infected with hepatitisC. At present, an estimated 4 million individuals are infected with hepatitis C, of whom10% have cirrhosis. Of those who develop cirrhosis due to hepatitis C, ~5% will developHCC. Other common risk factors for development of HCC include cirrhosis from anycause, chronic hepatitis B or C infection, alcoholism, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, aﬂa-toxin B exposure, and primary biliary cirrhosis. Aﬂatoxin B is a mycotoxin produced byAspergillus  species that is found in stored grains in hot and humid places. It is the best
studied and most potent naturally occurring carcinogen associated with HCC. In theUnited States, ~20% of individuals diagnosed with HCC do not have cirrhosis. In theseindividuals, the etiology of HCC is unknown, and the natural history is not well deﬁned.
III-6. The answer is C.   (Chap. 58)   This blood smear shows fragmented red blood cells of vary-
ing size and shape. In the presence of a foreign body within the circulation (prosthetic heartvalve, vascular graft), red blood cells can become destroyed. Such intravascular hemolysiswill also cause serum lactate dehydrogenase to be elevated and hemoglobinuria. In isolatedextravascular hemolysis, there is no hemoglobin or hemosiderin released into the urine.The characteristic peripheral blood smear in splenomegaly is the presence of Howell-Jollybodies (nuclear remnants within red blood cells). Certain diseases are associated with ex-tramedullary hematopoiesis (e.g., chronic hemolytic anemias), which can be detected by anenlarged spleen, thickened calvarium, myeloﬁbrosis, or hepatomegaly. The peripheralblood smear may show tear-drop cells or nucleated red blood cells. Hypothyroidism is asso-ciated with macrocytosis, which is not demonstrated here. Chronic gastrointestinal bloodloss will cause microcytosis, not schistocytes.
III-7. The answer is D.   (Chap. 352)   Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most common por-
phyria and usually arises from a sporadic gene mutation leading to a deﬁciency of the en-zyme uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. Despite being a hepatic porphyria, it usuallypresents with blistering skin lesions on the back of the hands. These lesions lead to areas ofatrophy and scarring after resolution. Neurologic symptoms are absent. Any condition thatincreases hepatic iron will exacerbate PCT. PCT is associated with alcoholism, hepatitis C,estrogens, elevated serum iron, and HIV infection. Rare forms of PCT are familial. 5-ALAdehydratase-deﬁcient porphyria is inherited in autosomal recessive fashion. Acute intermit-tent porphyria, erythropoietic porphyria, and variegate porphyria are autosomal dominant.
III-8. The answer is C.   (Chap. 97; Sillevis Smith et al.)   One of the better characterized para-
neoplastic neurologic syndromes is cerebellar ataxia caused by Purkinje cell drop-out inthe cerebellum; it is manifested by dysarthria, limb and gait ataxia, and nystagmus. Radio-logic imaging reveals cerebellar atrophy. Many antibodies have been associated with thissyndrome, including anti-Y o, anti-Tr, and antibodies to the glutamate receptor. Althoughlung cancer, particularly small-cell cancer, accounts for a large number of patients withneoplasm-associated cerebellar ataxia, those with the syndrome who display anti-Y o anti-bodies in the serum typically have breast or ovarian cancer.
III-9. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 101 and 313)   This patient’s lupus and her rapid development
of truly life-threatening hemolytic anemia are both very suggestive of autoimmunehemolytic anemia. Diagnosis is made by a positive Coomb’s test documenting antibodies tothe red cell membrane, but smear will often show microspherocytes, indicative of the dam-
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 73
age incurred to the red cells in the spleen. Schistocytes are typical for microangiopathic
hemolytic anemias such as hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) or thrombocytopenicthrombotic purpura (TTP). The lack of thrombocytopenia makes these diagnoses consid-erably less plausible. Macrocytosis and PMN’s with hypersegmented nuclei are very sugges-tive of vitamin B
12 deﬁciency, which causes a more chronic, non-life-threatening anemia.
Target cells are seen in liver disease and thalassemias. Sickle cell anemia is associated withaplastic crises, but she has no known diagnosis of sickle cell disease and is showing evidenceof erythropoietin response based on the presence of elevated reticulocyte count.
III-10. The answer is A.   (Chap. 58)   An accurate reticulocyte count is a critical component of
the laboratory workup of anemia. There are two corrections that need to be made to thereticulocyte count when it is being used to estimate the marrow’s response to anemia.The ﬁrst correction adjusts the reticulocyte count for the number of circulating red cells(i.e., the percentage of reticulocytes may be increased although the absolute number isunchanged). The absolute reticulocyte count = reticulocyte count * (hematocrit/expectedhematocrit). Second, when there is evidence of prematurely released reticulocytes on theblood smear (polychromatophilia), prolonged maturation in the serum may cause afalsely high estimate of daily red blood cell production. Correction is achieved by divid-ing by a “maturation time correction,” usually 2 if the hematocrit is between 25% and35%. In this example, the reticulocyte production index is: 5 * (25/45)/2, or 1.4. If a retic-ulocyte production index is <2 in the face of anemia, a defect in erythroid marrow prolif-eration must be present. Gastrointestinal bleeding should be considered in thisdemographic; however, a low reticulocyte count with normal iron stores argues stronglyfor a defect in erythroid proliferation. A ferritin >200 µg/L indicates that there are some
iron stores present. Clues for extravascular hemolysis include an elevated lactate dehy-drogenase, spherocytes on the peripheral blood smear, and hepatosplenomegaly. Intra-vascular hemolysis (disseminated intravascular coagulation, mechanical heart valve,thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura) will show schistocytes on peripheral smear.
III-11. The answer is D.   (Chap. 102)   Pure red cell aplasia is a normochromic, normocytic
anemia with absent erythroblasts on the bone marrow, hence the diminished number orlack of reticulocytes. The bone marrow shows red cell aplasia and the presence of giantpronormoblasts. Several conditions have been associated with pure red cell aplasia, in-cluding viral infections such as B19 parvovirus (which can have cytopathic bone marrowchanges), HIV , EBV , HTLV , and hepatitis B virus; malignancies such as thymomas andlymphoma (which often present with an anterior mediastinal mass); connective tissuedisorders such as SLE and rheumatoid arthritis (RA); pregnancy; drugs; and hereditarydisorders. Erythropoietin levels are elevated because of the anemia.
III-12. The answer is A.   (Chap. 87)   This patient has Streptococcus bovis  endocarditis. For un-
known reasons, individuals who develop endocarditis or septicemia from this fecal or-ganism have a high frequency of having occult colorectal carcinomas. Upper gastrointest inal
tumors have been described as well. All patients with S. bovis endocarditis should receive
colonoscopy after stabilization. T obacco use has been linked to the development of colo-rectal adenomas, particularly after >35 years of tobacco use, again for unknown reasons.Patients with illicit drug use (diagnosed by toxicology screen) are at risk of endocarditisdue to Staphylococcus aureus . A head CT scan looking for embolic lesions is not necessary
in the absence of physical ﬁndings or large vegetations that are prone to embolize. Pa-tients with endocarditis often have renal abnormalities, including microscopic hematuriafrom immune complex deposition, but a renal biopsy to evaluate for glomerulonephritisis not indicated in the presence of documented endocarditis. A pulmonary embolus,while certainly a possible event during hospitalization, would not be associated with theacute presentation of S. bovis  endocarditis.
III-13. The answer is A.   (Chap. 88)   This patient is presenting with painless jaundice and acholic
stools. On right upper quadrant ultrasound, the gallbladder cannot be visualized, suggestingcollapse of the gallbladder. In addition, there is dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, butnot the common bile duct, suggesting a tumor at the bifurcation of the common bile duct.
74 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
This tumor is a type of cholangiocarcinoma called a Klatskin tumor . The incidence of cho-
langiocarcinoma appears to be increasing. In general, the cause of most cholangiocarci-
noma is unknown, but there is an increased risk in primary sclerosing cholangitis, liverﬂukes, alcoholic liver disease, and any cause of chronic biliary injury. Cholangiocarcinomatypically presents as painless jaundice. Imaging usually shows dilatation of the bile ducts,and the extent of dilatation depends upon the site of obstruction. Diagnosis is usually madeduring endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which deﬁnes the biliarytree and allows a biopsy to be taken. Hilar cholangiocarcinoma is resectable in about 30% ofpatients, and the mean survival is ~24 months. Cholecystitis is typically associated with fe-ver, chills, and abdominal pain. The degree of jaundice would not be expected to be as highas is seen in this patient. Gallbladder cancer should present with a gallbladder mass ratherthan a collapsed gallbladder, and chronic right upper quadrant pain is usually present. Hep-atocellular carcinoma may be associated with painless jaundice but is not associated with di-latation of intrahepatic bile ducts and the marked elevation in alkaline phosphatase.Malignancy at the head of the pancreas may present in a similar fashion but should not re-sult in gallbladder collapse. In addition, the common bile duct should be markedly dilated.
III-14. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 96 and 347)   Hypercalcemia is a common oncologic complica-
tion of metastatic cancer. Symptoms include confusion, lethargy, change in mental status,fatigue, polyuria, and constipation. Regardless of the underlying disease, the treatment issimilar. These patients are often dehydrated, as hypercalcemia may cause a nephrogenicdiabetes insipidus, and are often unable to take ﬂuids orally. Therefore, the primary man-agement entails reestablishment of euvolemia. Often hypercalcemia will resolve with hy-dration alone. Bisphosphonates are another mainstay of therapy as they stabilize osteoclastresorption of calcium from the bone. However, their effects may take 1 to 2 days to mani-fest. Care must be taken in cases of renal insufﬁciency as rapid administration of pamidro-nate may exacerbate renal failure. Once euvolemia is achieved, furosemide may be given toincrease calciuresis. Nasal or subcutaneous calcitonin further aids the shift of calcium outof the intravascular space. Glucocorticoids may be useful in patients with lymphoid malig-nancies as the mechanism of hypercalcemia in those conditions is often related to excesshydroxylation of vitamin D. However, in this patient with prostate cancer, dexamethasonewill have little effect on the calcium level and may exacerbate the altered mental status.
III-15. The answer is C.   (Chap. 92)   Ninety percent of persons with nonseminomatous germ cell
tumors produce either AFP or β-hCG; in contrast, persons with pure seminomas usually
produce neither. These tumor markers are present for some time after surgery; if the presur-gical levels are high, 30 days or more may be required before meaningful postsurgical levelscan be obtained. The half-lives of AFP and β-hCG are 6 days and 1 day, respectively. After
treatment, unequal reduction of β -hCG and AFP may occur, suggesting that the two markers
are synthesized by heterogeneous clones of cells within the tumor; thus, both markers shouldbe followed. β-hCG is similar to luteinizing hormone except for its distinctive beta subunit.
III-16. The answer is C.   (Chap. 270)   Abdominal pain can be a sign of an oncologic emergency,
both obstructive or metabolic. The differential diagnosis is broad; however, when there isobstruction, constipation and colicky abdominal pain are prominent. The pain may alsobe exacerbated postprandially. Normal imaging, moreover, suggests the abnormality ismetabolic or may be due to peritoneal metastases too small to be seen on standard imag-ing. Adrenal insufﬁciency is suggested by mild hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, the his-tory of breast cancer and use of megestrol acetate. Adrenal insufﬁciency may gounrecognized because the symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, orthostasis, or hypoten-sion may be mistakenly attributed to progressive cancer or to therapy.
III-17. The answer is B.   (Chap. 87)   Most colorectal cancers arise from adenomatous polyps.
Only adenomas are premalignant, and only a minority of these lesions becomes malig-nant. Most polyps are asymptomatic, causing occult bleeding in <5% of patients. Sessile(ﬂat-based) polyps are more likely to become malignant than pedunculated (stalked) pol-yps. Histologically, villous adenomas are more likely to become malignant than tubularadenomas. The risk of containing invasive carcinoma in the polyp increases with size with
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 75
<2% in polyps <1.5 cm, 2–10% in polyps 1.5–2.5 cm, and 10% in polyps >2. 5 cm. This
patient had two polyps that were high-risk based on histology (villous) and appearance(sessile) but only moderate risk by size (<1.5 cm). Polyps, particularly those >2.5 cm insize, sometimes contain cancer cells but usually progress to cancer quite slowly over a~5-year period. Patients with adenomatous polyps should have a follow-up colonoscopyor radiographic study in 3 years. If no polyps are found on initial study, the test (endo-scopic or radiographic) should be repeated in 10 years. CT scan is only warranted for stag-ing if there is a diagnosis of colon cancer, not for the presence of polyps alone.
III-18. The answer is A.   (Chap. 103)   Polycythemia vera (PV) is a clonal disorder that involves
a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell. Clinically, it is characterized by a prolifera-tion of red blood cells, granulocytes, and platelets. The precise etiology is unknown.Erythropoiesis is regulated by the hormone erythropoietin. Hypoxia is the physiologicstimulus that increases the number of cells that produce erythropoietin. Erythropoietinmay be elevated in patients with hormone-secreting tumors. Levels are usually “normal”in patients with hypoxic erythrocytosis. In polycythemia vera, however, because erythro-cytosis occurs independently of erythropoietin, levels of the hormone are usually low.Therefore, an elevated level is not consistent with the diagnosis. Polycythemia is a
chronic, indolent disease with a low rate of transformation to acute leukemia, especiallyin the absence of treatment with radiation or hydroxyurea. Thrombotic complicationsare the main risk for PV and correlate with the erythrocytosis. Thrombocytosis, althoughsometimes prominent, does not correlate with the risk of thrombotic complications. Sal-icylates are useful in treating erythromelalgia but are not indicated in asymptomatic pa-tients. There is no evidence that thrombotic risk is signiﬁcantly lowered with their use inpatients whose hematocrits are appropriately controlled with phlebotomy. Phlebotomy isthe mainstay of treatment. Induction of a state of iron deﬁciency is critical to prevent areexpansion of the red blood cell mass. Chemotherapeutics and other agents are useful incases of symptomatic splenomegaly. Their use is limited by side effects, and there is a riskof leukemogenesis with hydroxyurea.
III-19. The answer is C.   (Chap. 95)   The patient presents with symptoms suggestive of ovarian
cancer. Although her peritoneal ﬂuid is positive for adenocarcinoma, further speciationcannot be done. Surprisingly, the physical examination and imaging do not show a pri-mary source. Although the differential diagnosis of this patient’s disorder includes gastriccancer or another gastrointestinal malignancy and breast cancer, peritoneal carcinomato-sis most commonly is due to ovarian cancer in women, even when the ovaries are normalat surgery. Elevated CA-125 levels or the presence of psammoma bodies is further sugges-tive of an ovarian origin, and such patients should receive surgical debulking and carbo-platin or cisplatin plus paclitaxel. Patients with this presentation have a similar stage-speciﬁc survival compared with other patients with known ovarian cancer. T en percent ofpatients with this disorder, also known as primary peritoneal papillary serous carcinoma,will remain disease-free 2 years after treatment.
III-20. The answer is C.   (Chap. 102)   Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) is a condition characterized
by the absence of reticulocytes and erythroid precursors. A variety of conditions maycause PRCA. It may be idiopathic. It may be associated with certain medications, such astrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) and phenytoin. It can be associated with avariety of neoplasms, either as a precursor to a hematologic malignancy such as leukemiaor myelodysplasia or as part of an autoimmune phenomenon, as in the case of thymoma.Infections also may cause a pure red cell aplasia. Parvovirus B19 is a single-strand DNAvirus that is associated with erythema infectiosum, or ﬁfth disease in children. It is alsoassociated with arthropathy and a ﬂulike illness in adults. It is thought to attack the P an-tigen on proerythroblasts directly. Patients with a chronic hemolytic anemia, such assickle cell disease, or with an immunodeﬁciency are less able to tolerate a transient dropin reticulocytes as their red blood cells do not survive in the peripheral blood for an ade-quate period. In this patient, her daughter had an illness before the appearance of hersymptoms. It is reasonable to check her parvovirus IgM titers. If they are positive, a dose
76 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
of intravenous immunoglobulin is indicated. Because her laboratories and smear are not
suggestive of dramatic sickling, an exchange transfusion is not indicated. Immunosup-pression with prednisone and/or cyclosporine may be indicated if another etiology of thePRCA is identiﬁed. However, that would not be the next step. Similarly, a bone marrowtransplant might be a consideration in a young patient with myelodysplasia or leukemia,but there is no evidence of that at this time. Antibiotics have no role in light of her nor-mal white blood cell count and the lack of evidence for a bacterial infection.
III-21. The answer C.   (Chap. 101)   Hereditary spherocytosis is a heterogeneous red cell mem-
branopathy that can be either congenital (usually autosomal dominant) or acquired; it ischaracterized by predominantly extravascular hemolysis in the spleen due to defects inmembrane structural proteins. This spleen-mediated hemolysis leads to the conversionof classic biconcave red blood cells on smear to spherocytes. Splenomegaly is common.This disorder can be severe, depending on the site of mutation, but is often overlookeduntil some stressor such as pregnancy leads to a multifactorial anemia, or an infectionsuch as parvovirus B19 transiently eliminates red cell production altogether. The periph-eral blood smear shows microspherocytes, small densely staining red blood cells that havelost their central pallor. Acute treatment is with transfusion. G6PD deﬁciency is a causeof hemolysis that is usually triggered by the presence of an offending oxidative agent. Theperipheral blood smear may show Heinz bodies. Parvovirus infection may cause a purered cell aplasia. The presence of active reticulocytosis and laboratory ﬁndings consistentwith hemolysis are not compatible with that diagnosis. Chronic gastrointestinal bloodloss, such as due to a colonic polyp, would cause a microcytic, hypochromic anemiawithout evidence of hemolysis (indirect bilirubin, haptoglobin abnormalities).
III-22. The answer is E.   (Chap. 270)   Hyperleukocytosis is a potentially fatal complication of
acute leukemia when the blast count is >100,000/µL. Complications of the syndrome aremediated by hyperviscosity, tumor aggregates causing slow blood ﬂow, and invasion ofthe primitive leukemic cells, which cause hemorrhage. The brain and lungs are mostcommonly involved. The pulmonary syndrome may lead to respiratory distress and pro-gressive respiratory failure. Chest radiographs may show either alveolar or interstitial in-ﬁltrates. A common ﬁnding in patients with markedly elevated immature white bloodcell counts is low arterial oxygen tension on arterial blood gas with a normal pulse oxim-etry. This may actually be due to pseudohypoxemia, because white blood cells rapidlyconsume plasma oxygen during the delay between collecting arterial blood and measur-ing oxygen tension, causing a spuriously low measured oxygen tension. Placing the arte-rial blood gas immediately in ice will prevent the pseudohypoxemia. The bcr-ablmutation is found in up to 25% of patients with ALL. In addition, as tumor cells lyse, lac-tate dehydrogenase levels can rise rapidly. Methemoglobinemia is usually due to exposureto oxidizing agents such as antibiotics or local anesthetics. Respiratory symptoms maydevelop when methemoglobin levels are >10–15% (depending on hemoglobin concen-tration). Typically arterial Pa
O2 is normal and measured Sa O2 is inappropriately reduced
because pulse oximetry is inaccurate with high levels of methemoglobin.
III-23. The answer is D.   (Chap. 85; Ost et al.)   The evaluation of a solitary pulmonary nodule
(SPN) remains a combination of art and science. Approximately 50% of SPNs (less than3.0 cm) turn out to be malignant, but studies have found a range between 10 and 70%,depending on patient selection. If the SPN is malignant, surgical therapy can result in80% 5-year survival. Most benign lesions are infectious granulomas. Spiculated or scal-loped lesions are more likely to be malignant, whereas lesions with central or popcorncalciﬁcation are more likely to be benign. Masses (larger than 3.0 cm) are usually malig-nant. 
18FDG PET scanning has added a new test to the options for evaluating a SPN. PET
has over 95% sensitivity and 75% speciﬁcity for identifying a malignant SPN. False nega-tives occur with small (less than 1 cm) tumors, bronchoalveolar carcinomas, and carci-noid tumors. False positives are usually due to inﬂammation. In this patient with amoderate risk of malignancy (age over 45, lesion larger than 1 cm, positive smoking his-tory, suspicious lesion, no prior radiogram demonstrating the lesion) a PET scan would
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 77
be the most reasonable choice. PET is also useful for staging disease. The diagnostic accu-
racy of PET for malignant mediastinal lymph nodes approaches 90%. Another optionwould be a transthoracic needle biopsy, with a sensitivity of 80 to 95% and a speciﬁcity of50 to 85%. Transthoracic needle aspiration has the best results and the fewest complica-tions (pneumothorax) with peripheral lesions versus central lesions. Bronchoscopy has avery poor yield for lesions smaller than 2 cm. Mediastinoscopy would be of little valueunless PET or CT raised a suspicion of nodal disease. MRI scan will not add any informa-tion and is less able than CT to visualize lesions in the lung parenchyma. A repeat chestCT is a reasonable option for a patient with a low clinical suspicion.
III-24. The answer is A.   (Chap. 374)   About 25% of patients with cancer die with intracranial
metastases. Symptoms may relate to parenchymal or leptomeningeal involvement. Thesigns and symptoms of metastatic brain tumor are similar to those of other intracranialexpanding lesions: headache, nausea, vomiting, behavioral changes, seizures, and focalneurologic deﬁcits. Three percent to 8% of patients with cancer develop a tumor involv-ing the leptomeninges. These patients typically present with multifocal neurologic signsand symptoms. Signs include cranial nerve palsies, extremity weakness, paresthesias, andloss of deep tendon reﬂexes. CT and MRI are useful in establishing the diagnosis of intra-parenchymal lesions. The treatment of choice is radiotherapy. Solitary lesions in selectedpatients may be resected to achieve improved disease-free survival. The diagnosis of lep-tomeningeal disease is made by demonstrating tumor cells in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid(CSF). Each attempt has limited sensitivity, and so patients with clinical features sugges-tive of leptomeningeal disease should undergo three serial CSF samplings. Neoplasticmeningitis usually occurs in the setting of uncontrolled cancer outside the CNS. There-fore, the prognosis is typically dismal, with a median survival between 10 and 12 weeks.
III-25. The answer is C.   (Chap. 112)   Warfarin is the most widely used oral anticoagulant. Its
mechanism of action is to interfere with production of the vitamin K–dependent proco-agulant factors (prothrombin and factors VII, IX, and X) and anticoagulant factors (pro-teins C and S). Warfarin accumulates in the liver when it undergoes oxidative metabolismby the CYP2C9 system. Multiple medications can interfere with the metabolism of war-farin by this system causing both over- and underdosing of warfarin. This patient has re-cently been treated with a ﬂuoroquinolone antibiotic that is known to increase theprothrombin time and INR if the warfarin dose is not adjusted during treatment. Whenthe INR is >6, there is a greater risk of development of bleeding complications. However,if no evidence of bleeding is present at presentation, it is safe to hold warfarin and allowthe INR to fall gradually into the therapeutic range before reinstituting therapy ( DA Gar-
cia: J Am Coll Cardiol 47:804, 2006; J Ansell et al: Chest 126:204S, 2004 ). In this patient,
however, there is evidence of minor bleeding complications warranting treatment. Shelikely has developed a degree of hemorrhagic cystitis due to over-anticoagulation in thesetting of a urinary tract infection, which had already inﬂamed the bladder lining. In ad-dition, she had developed multiple ecchymoses. Thus, treatment of the elevated INR isindicated. In the absence of life-threatening bleeding, treatment with vitamin K is indi-cated. When the INR falls between 4.9 and 9, an oral dose of vitamin K, 1 mg, is usuallyadequate to correct the INR without conferring vitamin K resistance, evidenced by de-creased sensitivity to oral warfarin for an extended period. When a more rapid correctionof anticoagulation is needed, vitamin K can be given by the IV or IM route. However,there is a risk of anaphylaxis, shock, and death. This can be minimized by delivering thedrug slowly at a rate of ≤1 mg/min. Additionally, fresh-frozen plasma is indicated to re-
plete coagulation factors when there is signiﬁcant bleeding in the setting of an elevatedINR. While the SC route for delivery of vitamin K has long been a primary route of cor-rection, a meta-analysis has shown the SC route to be no better than placebo and inferiorto the oral and IV routes, which have similar efﬁcacy ( KJ Dezee et al. ).
III-26. The answer is D.   (Chap. e13)   Cancer is the second leading cause of mortality in the
United States. Millions of Americans who are alive today have cancer in their past history.Cardiac toxicity is typically related to prior treatment with anthracycline-based chemo-
78 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
therapy or mediastinal irradiation. This is seen most commonly in patients who have
survived Hodgkin’s or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Anthracycline-related cardiotoxicity isdose-dependent. About 5% of patients who receive more than 550 mg/m
2 of doxorubicin
will develop congestive heart failure (CHF). Rates are higher in those with other cardiacrisk factors and those who have received mediastinal irradiation. Unfortunately, anthra-cycline-related CHF is typically not reversible. Intracellular chelators or liposomal for-mulations of the chemotherapy may prevent cardiotoxicity, but their impact on curerates is unclear. Radiation has both acute and chronic effects on the heart. It may result inacute and chronic pericarditis, myocardial ﬁbrosis, and accelerated atherosclerosis. Themean time to onset of “acute” pericarditis is 9 months after treatment, and so caretakersmust be vigilant. Similarly, chronic pericarditis may manifest years later.
III-27. The answer is C.   (Chap. 111)   Low-molecular-weight heparins are cleared renally, and
these drugs have been described as causing signiﬁcant bleeding in patients on hemodialy-sis. They should not be used in patients with dialysis-dependent renal failure. They areclass B drugs for pregnancy and dosage is weight-based. Their utility is not affected by di-abetes mellitus or hepatic dysfunction. Thrombocytopenia is a rare side effect of bothunfractionated heparin and LMWH, but LMWH should not be used in someone with adocumented history of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
III-28. The answer is D.   (Chap. e13)   The focus of cancer care is cure. Many individuals who
are fortunate enough to survive the malignancy will nevertheless bear chronic stigmata,both psychological and medical, of the treatment. Anthracyclines, which are used fre-quently in the treatment of breast cancer, Hodgkin’s disease, lymphoma, and leukemia,are toxic to the myocardium and, at high doses, can lead to heart failure. Bleomycin re-sults in pulmonary toxicity. Pulmonary ﬁbrosis and pulmonary venoocclusive diseasemay result. Liver dysfunction is common with a number of chemotherapy agents. How-ever, cisplatin primarily causes renal toxicity and acute renal failure. It may also causeneuropathy and hearing loss, but liver dysfunction is not a common complication. Ifosfa-mide may cause signiﬁcant neurologic toxicity and renal failure. Also, it may cause aproximal tubular defect resembling Fanconi syndrome. Cyclophosphamide may result incystitis and increases the long-term risk of bladder cancer. Administration of mesna ame-liorates but does not completely eliminate this risk.
III-29. The answer is B.   (Chap. 112)   The most likely diagnosis in this patient is heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), and heparin should be stopped immediately whilecontinuing anticoagulation with the direct thrombin inhibitor, argatroban. HIT shouldbe suspected in individuals with a fall in platelet count by >50% of pretreatment levels.Usually the fall in platelet counts occurs 5–13 days after starting heparin, but it can occurearlier if there is a prior exposure to heparin, which this patient undoubtedly has becauseof his mechanical mitral valve replacement. While a platelet count of <100,000/µL ishighly suggestive of HIT, in most individuals, the platelet count rarely falls this low. HITis caused by IgG antibodies directed against antigens on PF4 that are exposed when hep-arin binds to this protein. The IgG antibody binds simultaneously to the heparin-PF4complex and the Fc receptor on platelet surface and causes platelet activation, resulting ina hypercoagulable state. Individuals with HIT are at increased risk of both arterial andvenous thromboses, although venous thromboses are much more common. Demonstra-tion of antibodies directed against the heparin–platelet factor complex is suggestive of,but not sufﬁcient for, diagnosis because these antibodies may be present in the absence ofclinical HIT. The serotonin release assay is the most speciﬁc test for determining if HIT ispresent. This assay determines the amount of serotonin released when washed plateletsare exposed to patient serum and varying concentrations of heparin. In the cases of HIT,addition of patient serum to the test causes platelet activation and serotonin release dueto the presence of heparin-PF4 antibodies. However, treatment of HIT should not be de-layed until deﬁnitive diagnosis as there is a high risk of thrombotic events if heparin iscontinued. The risk of thrombotic events due to HIT is increased for about 1 month afterheparin is discontinued. Thus, all patients with HIT should be continued on anticoagula-
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 79
tion until the risk of thrombosis is decreased, regardless of whether there is additional
need of ongoing anticoagulation. Patients should not be switched to low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). While the incidence of HIT is lower with LMWH, there iscross-reactivity with heparin-PF4 antibodies, and thrombosis can occur. Choice of anti-coagulation should be with either a direct thrombin inhibitor or a factor Xa inhibitor.The direct thrombin inhibitors include lepirudin, argatroban, and bivalirudin. In this pa-tient, argatroban is the appropriate choice because the patient has developed acute renalfailure in association with contrast dye administration for the cardiac catheterization. Ar-gatroban is hepatically metabolized and is safe to give in renal failure, whereas lepirudinis renally metabolized. Dosage of lepirudin in renal failure is unpredictable, and lepirudinshould not be used in this setting. The factor Xa inhibitors, fondaparinux or danaparoid,are also possible treatments for HIT, but due to renal metabolism, are also contraindica-ted in this patient. Finally, warfarin is contraindicated as sole treatment for HIT as the fallin vitamin K–dependent anticoagulant factors, especially factor C, can further increaserisk of thrombosis and trigger skin necrosis.
III-30. The answer is C.    (Chap. 61)   This patient presents with signs and symptoms of eosino-
philia-myalgia syndrome, which is triggered by ingestion of contaminants in 
L-tryptophan-
containing products. This is a multisystem disease that can present acutely and can be fa-tal. The two clinical hallmarks are marked eosinophilia and myalgias without any obvi-ous etiology. Eosinophilic fasciitis, pneumonitis, and myocarditis may be present. Typicaleosinophil counts are >1000/µL. Treatment includes withdrawal of all 
L-tryptophan-
containing products and administration of glucocorticoids. Lactose intolerance is verycommon and typically presents with diarrhea and gas pains temporally related to inges-tion of lactose-containing foods. While systemic lupus erythematosus can present inmyriad ways, eosinophilia and myalgias are atypical of this illness. Celiac disease, alsoknown as gluten-sensitive enteropathy, is characterized by malabsorption and weight lossand can present with non-gastrointestinal symptoms; these classically include arthritisand central nervous system disturbance. The case above would not be compatible withceliac disease.
III-31. The answer is B.   (Chap. 78)   The American Cancer Society recommends yearly Pap
testing beginning at age 21 or 3 years after ﬁrst intercourse. The United States Preven-tive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends Pap testing every 1–3 years forwomen ages 18–65. At age 30, women who have had 3 successive years of normal testresults may extend the screening interval to 2–3 years. An upper age limit at whichscreening ceases to be effective is unknown, however, women >70 years may choose tostop testing if they have had normal Pap smears for the previous 10 years. Womenwho have no cervical remnant (i.e., with total hysterectomy) do not require Pap smeartesting. Current recommendations advise continued Pap screening even after receiv-ing HPV vaccination given that the vaccine does not protect against all forms of hu-man papilloma virus that cause cervical cancer. The vaccine protects against thestrains that cause about 70% of the cervical cancers.
III-32. The answer is F .   (Chap. 105)   Viscosity testing is typically reserved for cases of multiple
myeloma where paraproteins (particularly IgM) can lead to vascular sludging and subse-quent tissue ischemia. ALL can lead to end-organ abnormalities in kidney and liver there-fore routine chemistry tests are indicated. A lumbar puncture must be performed in casesof newly diagnosed ALL to rule out spread of disease to the central nervous system. Bonemarrow biopsy reveals the degree of marrow inﬁltration and is often necessary for classi-ﬁcation of the tumor. Immunologic cell-surface marker testing often identiﬁes the celllineage involved and the type of tumor, information that is often impossible to discernfrom morphologic interpretation alone. Cytogenetic testing provides key prognostic in-formation on the disease natural history.
III-33. The answer is A.   (Chap. 78)   Lead-time bias, length-time bias, selection bias, overdiag-
nosis bias, and avoidance bias can make a screening test appear to improve outcomeswhen it does not. When lead-time bias occurs, survival appears increased, but life is not
80 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
truly prolonged. The test only lengthens the time that the patient, the physician, or the
investigator is aware of the disease. When length-time bias occurs, aggressive cancers arenot detected during screening, presumably due to the higher mortality from these can-cers and the length of the screening interval. Selection bias can occur when the test popu-lation is either healthier or at higher risk for developing the condition than the generalpublic. Overdiagnosis bias, such as with some indolent forms of prostate cancer, detectsconditions that will never cause signiﬁcant mortality or morbidity during a person’s life-time. The goal of screening is to detect disease at an earlier and more curable stage.
III-34. The answer is B.   (Chap. 352)   The porphyrias are a group of metabolic disorders result-
ing from a speciﬁc enzyme deﬁciency in the heme synthesis pathway. All are inherited ex-cept porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), which is usually sporadic. The porphyrias areclassiﬁed as erythropoietic or hepatic, depending on the primary site of overproductionor accumulation of porphyrins or precursors. The predominant symptoms of the hepaticporphyrias (e.g., acute intermittent porphyria, PCT) are neurologic including pain, neu-ropathy, and mental disturbances. The erythropoietic porphyrias usually present withcutaneous photosensitivity at birth. However, PCT, which is a hepatic porphyria, usuallypresents with skin lesions. The genetic mutations that cause each type of porphyria havebeen elucidated, and demonstration of a speciﬁc gene defect or resulting enzyme deﬁ-ciency is required for deﬁnitive diagnosis. Clinical symptoms of porphyria are notori-ously nonspeciﬁc with great overlap. Laboratory measurements of fecal, urinary, orplasma protoporphyrins, porphobilinogens, or porphyrins during a crisis will help guidediagnosis but require further testing for conﬁrmation. The symptoms of many of theporphyrias are exacerbated by a large number and wide variety of drugs.
III-35. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 110 and 111)    Lupus anticoagulants cause prolongation of
coagulation tests by binding to phospholipids. Although most often encountered in pa-tients with SLE, they may develop in normal individuals. The diagnosis is ﬁrst suggestedby prolongation of coagulation tests. Failure to correct with incubation with normalplasma conﬁrms the presence of a circulating inhibitor. Contrary to the name, patientswith LA activity have normal hemostasis and are not predisposed to bleeding. Instead,they are at risk for venous and arterial thromboembolisms. Patients with a history of re-current unplanned abortions or thrombosis should undergo lifelong anticoagulation.The presence of lupus anticoagulants or anticardiolipin antibodies without a history ofthrombosis may be observed as many of these patients will not go on to develop athrombotic event.
III-36. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 110 and 111)    Factor V Leiden refers to a point mutation in
the factor V gene (arginine to glutamine at position 506). This makes the molecule resis-tant to degradation by activated protein C. This disorder alone may account for up to25% of inherited prothrombotic states, making it the most common of these disorders.Heterozygosity for this mutation increases an individual’s lifetime risk of venous throm-boembolism sevenfold. A homozygote has a 20-fold increased risk of thrombosis. Pro-thrombin gene mutation is probably the second most common condition that causes“hypercoagulability.” Antithrombin, protein C, and protein S deﬁciencies are more rare.Antithrombin complexes with activated coagulation proteins and blocks their biologicactivity. Deﬁciency in antithrombin therefore promotes prolonged activity of coagulationproteins, resulting in thrombosis. Similarly, protein C and protein S are involved in theproteolysis of factors Va and VIIIa, which shuts off ﬁbrin formation. Because proteins Cand S are dependent on vitamin K for carboxylation, administration of warfarin antico-agulants may lower the level of proteins C and S more quickly relative to factors II, VII,IX, and X, thereby promoting coagulation. Patients with protein C deﬁciency may de-velop warfarin-related skin necrosis.
III-37. The answer is E.   (Chap. 112)   Low-molecular-weight heparins have become widely
used in the management of uncomplicated DVT and pulmonary embolus due to theirease of administration and predictable anticoagulant effects. LMWH is derived from un-fractionated heparin by chemical or enzymatic depolymerization that results in smaller
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 81
fragments of heparin, weighing approximately one-third the mean molecular mass of un-
fractionated heparin. The mechanism of action of the LMWH is different from that ofheparin in that the anticoagulant effect of LMWH is related to its ability to potentiate fac-tor Xa inhibition via activating antithrombin. While heparin does have the ability to po-tentiate factor Xa, heparin primarily acts as a cofactor to activate antithrombin andbinding antithrombin to thrombin. In order to activate antithrombin, an 18-unit poly-saccharide chain is required. With a mean molecular mass of 5000 kD, the average pen-tasaccharide chain of LMWH is only 17 units, and thus over half the LMWH moleculeslack the ability to bridge antithrombin to thrombin. A further difference between LMWHand unfractionated heparin is that LMWH is less bound to proteins in plasma, resultingin >90% bioavailability after SC injection. Thus, LMWHs have a more predictable anti-coagulant response and a longer half-life. Because of the pharmacokinetics of LMWH,most individuals do not require monitoring of factor Xa levels to ensure adequate antico-agulation, allowing for outpatient treatment of uncomplicated DVT and pulmonary em-bolus. When outcomes are compared with heparin, LMWHs are equally effective fortreatment, but there is substantial health care savings when outpatient treatment is used.Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that serious bleeding events are less likely to oc-cur with LMWH than with unfractionated heparin. Thrombocytopenia is also less likelyto occur with LMWH compared to unfractionated heparin. A meta-analysis of 5275 pa-tients on 13 studies suggested that the rates of thrombocytopenia in patients on unfrac-tionated heparin and LMWH may actually be similar ( Morris et al., 2007 ). Caution
should be taken, however, when using LMWH in individuals who are obese, pregnant, orhave renal insufﬁciency. In these instances, monitoring of factor Xa levels is required toensure adequacy of dosing without evidence of drug accumulation.
III-38. The answer is B.   (Chap. 112; CL Bennett.)   The patient has evidence of thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) from clopidogrel manifested as altered mental status,fever, acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.The peripheral blood smear show anisocytosis with schistocytes and platelet clumpingconsistent with this disease. Clopidogrel is a thienopyridine antiplatelet agent that isknown to be associated with life-threatening hematologic effects, including neutropenia,TTP , and aplastic anemia. The true incidence of TTP associated with thienopyridine useis unknown, but it occurs with both clopidogrel and ticlopidine use. When compared toticlopidine, TTP associated with clopidogrel use occurs earlier (often within 2 weeks) andtends to be less responsive to therapy with plasmapheresis. In addition, individuals withTTP associated with clopidogrel generally have a higher platelet count and creatinine andtheir TTP is less likely to be associated with ADAMTS13 deﬁciency, a von Willebrand fac-tor–cleaving protease implicated in the pathogenesis of idiopathic TTP . The mortality ofTTP associated with thienopyridines is approximately 25–30%.
III-39. The answer is B.   (Chap. 94)   Metastatic tumors of bone are more common than pri-
mary bone tumors. Prostate, breast, and lung primaries account for 80% of all bone me-tastases. Tumors from the kidney, bladder, and thyroid and lymphomas and sarcomasalso commonly metastasize to bone. Metastases usually spread hematogenously. In de-creasing order, the most common sites of bone metastases include vertebrae, proximal fe-mur, pelvis, ribs, sternum, proximal humerus, and skull. Pain is the most commonsymptom. Hypercalcemia may occur with bone destruction. Lesions may be osteolytic,osteoblastic, or both. Osteoblastic lesions are associated with a higher level of alkalinephosphatase.
III-40. The answer is D.   (Chap. 101)   Each of the listed diagnoses has a rather characteristic set
of laboratory ﬁndings that are virtually diagnostic for the disease once the disease hasprogressed to a severe stage. Both HUS and TTP cause hemolysis and thrombocytopenia,as well as fevers. Cerebrovascular events and mental status change occur more commonlyin TTP , and renal failure is more common in HUS. Severe leptospirosis, or Weil’s disease,is notable for fevers, hyperbilirubinemia, and renal failure. Conjunctival suffusion is an-other helpful clue. Acute promyelocytic leukemia is notable for anemia, thrombocytope-
82 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
nia, and either elevated or decreased white blood cell count, all in the presence of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. PNH is a rare disorder characterized by hemo-lytic anemia (particularly at night), venous thrombosis, and deﬁcient hematopoiesis. It isa stem cell–derived intracorpuscular defect. Anemia is usually moderate in severity, andthere is often concomitant granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia. Venous thrombosisoccurs much more commonly than in the population at large. The intraabdominal veinsare often involved, and patients may present with Budd-Chiari syndrome. Cerebral sinusthrombosis is a common cause of death in patients with PNH. The presence of pancy-topenia and hemolysis should raise suspicion for this diagnosis, even before the develop-ment of a venous thrombosis. In the past PNH was diagnosed by abnormalities on theHam or sucrose lysis test; however, currently ﬂow cytometry analysis of glycosylphos-phatidylinositol (GPI) linked proteins (such as CD55 and CD59) on red blood cells andgranulocytes is recommended.
III-41. The answer is A.   (Chap. 103)   Chronic idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis (IMF) is the least com-
mon myeloproliferative disorder and is considered a diagnosis of exclusion after othercauses of myeloﬁbrosis have been ruled out. The typical patient with IMF presents in thesixth decade, and the disorder is asymptomatic in many patients. Fevers, fatigue, nightsweats, and weight loss may occur in IMF whereas these symptoms are rare in other my-eloproliferative disorders. However, no signs or symptoms are speciﬁc for the diagnosisof IMF. Often marked splenomegaly is present and may extend across the midline and tothe pelvic brim. A peripheral blood smear demonstrates the typical ﬁndings of myeloﬁ-brosis including teardrop-shaped red blood cells, nucleated red blood cells, myelocytes,and metamyelocytes that are indicative of extramedullary hematopoiesis. Anemia is usu-ally mild, and platelet and leukocyte counts are often normal. Bone marrow aspirate isfrequently unsuccessful because the extent of marrow ﬁbrosis makes aspiration impossi-ble. When a bone marrow biopsy is performed, it demonstrates hypercellular marrowwith trilineage hyperplasia and increased number of megakaryocytes with large dysplas-tic nuclei. Interestingly, individuals with IMF often have associated autoantibodies, in-cluding rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, or a positive Coomb’s tests. T odiagnose someone as having IMF, it must be shown that they do not have another myelo-proliferative disorder or hematologic malignancy that is the cause of myeloﬁbrosis. Themost common disorders that present in a similar fashion to IMF are polycythemia veraand chronic myelogenous leukemia. Other nonmalignant disorders that can cause mye-loﬁbrosis include HIV infection, hyperparathyroidism, renal osteodystrophy, systemic lu-pus erythematosus, tuberculosis, and marrow replacement in other cancers such asprostate or breast cancer. In the patient described here, there is no other identiﬁablecause of myeloﬁbrosis; thus chronic idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis can be diagnosed.
III-42. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 96 and 270)   Although it once was thought that most cases of
hypercalcemia of malignancy are due to a direct resorption of bone by the tumor, it isnow recognized that 80% of such instances occur because of the production of a proteincalled parathyroid hormone reactive protein (PTHrP) by the tumor. PTHrP shares 80%homology in the ﬁrst 13 terminal amino acids with native parathyroid hormone. The ab-errantly produced molecule is essentially functionally identical to native parathyroid hor-mone in that it causes renal calcium conservation, osteoclast activation and boneresorption, renal phosphate wasting, and increased levels of urinary cyclic adeninemonophosphate (cAMP). Only about 20% of cases of the hypercalcemia malignancy aredue to local production of substances, such as transforming growth factor and IL-1 or IL-6, which cause bone resorption at the local level and release of calcium from bony stores.Although aggressive hydration with saline and administration of a loop diuretic are help-ful in the short-term management of patients with the hypercalcemia of malignancy, themost important therapy is the administration of a bisphosphonate, such as pamidronate,that will control the laboratory abnormalities and the associated symptoms in the vastmajority of these patients. Symptoms of hypercalcemia are nonspeciﬁc and include fa-tigue, lethargy, polyuria, nausea, vomiting, and decreased mental acuity.
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 83
III-43. The answer is A.   (Chap. 61)   Under normal or nonstress conditions, roughly 90% of
the neutrophil pool is in the bone marrow, 2–3% in the circulation, and the remainder
in the tissues. The circulating pool includes the freely ﬂowing cells in the bloodstreamand the others are marginated in close proximity to the endothelium. Most of the mar-ginated pool is in the lung, which has a vascular endothelium surface area. Marginationin the postcapillary venules is mediated by selectins that cause a low-afﬁnity neutrophil–endothelial cell interaction that mediates “rolling” of the neutrophils along the endothe-lium. A variety of signals including interleukin 1, tumor necrosis factor α, and other
chemokines can cause leukocytes to proliferate and leave the marrow and enter the cir-culation. Neutrophil integrins mediate the stickiness of neutrophils to endothelium andare important for chemokine-induced cell activation. Infection causes a marked in-crease in bone marrow production of neutrophils that marginate and enter tissue. Acuteglucocorticoids increase neutrophil count by mobilizing cells from the bone marrowand marginated pool.
III-44. The answer is A.   (Chap. 101)   Haptoglobin is an α globulin normally present in serum.
It binds speciﬁcally to the globin portion of hemoglobin, and the complex is cleared bythe mononuclear cell phagocytosis. Haptoglobin is reduced in all hemolytic anemias as itbinds free hemoglobin. It can also be reduced in cirrhosis and so is not diagnostic ofhemolysis outside of the correct clinical context. Assuming a normal marrow and ironstores, the reticulocyte count will be elevated as well to try to compensate for the in-creased red cell destruction of hemolysis. Release of intracellular contents from the redcell (including hemoglobin and LDH) induces heme metabolism, producing unconju-gated bilirubinemia. If the haptoglobin system is overwhelmed, the kidney will ﬁlter freehemoglobin and reabsorb it in the proximal tubule for storage of iron by ferritin and he-mosiderin. Hemosiderin in the urine is a marker of ﬁltered hemoglobin by the kidneys.In massive hemolysis, free hemoglobin may be excreted in urine.
III-45. The answer is B.   (Chap. 112)   Antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents act by a variety of
mechanisms. Platelet aggregation is dependent initially on the binding of von Willebrandfactor and platelet glycoprotein IB. This initiates the release of a variety of molecules, in-cluding thromboxane A
2 and adenosine diphosphate (ADP), resulting in platelet aggre-
gation. Glycoprotein IIB/IIIa receptors recognize the amino acid sequence that is presentin adhesive proteins such as ﬁbrinogen. Coagulation occurs by a convergence of differentpathways on the prothrombinase complex, which mediates the conversion of ﬁbrinogento ﬁbrin, thus forming the clot. Factor Xa and factor Va are two of the essential compo-nents of the prothrombinase complex. Abciximab is a monoclonal antibody of humanand murine protein that binds to GpIIb/IIIa. It and other inhibitors have been studiedextensively in patients with unstable angina, patients with MI, and those undergoing per-cutaneous coronary intervention. Clopidogrel acts by inhibiting ADP-induced plateletaggregation. It has been evaluated in many of the same settings either in place of or inconjunction with aspirin. Heparin acts to bind factor Xa and activate antithrombin. Low-molecular-weight heparins primarily act through anti–factor Xa activity. Fondaparinuxis a synthetic pentasaccharide that causes selective indirect inhibition of factor Xa. Lepi-rudin and argatroban are direct thrombin inhibitors. They are indicated in patients withheparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Warfarin acts by inhibiting vitamin K–dependentcarboxylation of factors II, VII, IX, and X.
III-46. The answer is E.   (Chap. 108)   In addition to chronic GHVD, there are late complica-
tions of bone marrow transplantation that result from the chemotherapy and radiother-apy preparative regimen. Children may experience decreased growth velocity and delayin the development of secondary sex characteristics. Hormone replacement may be nec-essary. Gonadal dysfunction is common. Men frequently become azoospermic, andwomen develop ovarian failure. Patients who receive total body irradiation are at risk forcataract formation and thyroid dysfunction. Although cognitive dysfunction may occurin the peritransplant period for many reasons, there is no deﬁnitive evidence that demen-tia occurs at an increased frequency.
84 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
III-47. The answer is E.   (Chap. 112)   Clopidogrel and ticlopidine are the two currently avail-
able members of the thienopyridine class of antiplatelet agents. As demonstrated in the
ﬁgure below, the mechanism of action of these agents is to prevent ADP-induced plateletaggregation by irreversibly inhibiting the P2Y
12 receptor. Both agents are prodrugs that
require hepatic activation by the cytochrome P450 system; in the usual dose they requireseveral days to reach maximal effectiveness. Clopidogrel is a more potent agent thanticlopidine with fewer associated side effects, and thus it has replaced ticlopidine in clini-cal practice.
Other antiplatelet drugs act at other sites in the cascade that leads to platelet aggrega-
tion. Aspirin is the most commonly used antiplatelet agent. At the usual doses, aspirininhibits COX-1 to prevent the production of thromboxane A
2, a potent platelet agonist.
Dipyridamole is a weak platelet inhibitor alone and acts as a phosphodiesterase inhibi-tor. In addition, dipyridamole blocks the uptake of adenosine by platelets. When com-bined with aspirin, dipyridamole has been shown to decrease the risk of stroke, butbecause it acts as a vasodilator, there is concern that it might increase the risk of cardiacevents in severe coronary artery disease. A ﬁnal class of antiplatelet agents is the glyco-protein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, which include abciximab, eptiﬁbatide, and tiroﬁban. Eachof these agents has a slightly different site of action, but all decrease the ability of plate-lets to bind adhesive molecules such as ﬁbrinogen and von Willebrand factor. Thus,these agents decrease platelet aggregation. Abciximab is a monoclonal antibody di-rected against the activated form of GPIIb/IIIa. Tiroﬁban and eptiﬁbatide are smallsynthetic molecules that bind to various sites of the GPIIb/IIIa receptor to decreaseplatelet aggregation.
III-48. The answer is C.   (Chap. 104)   This patient presents with typical ﬁndings of chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) which has an incidence of 1.5 per 100,000 people yearly.The typical age of onset is in the mid-forties and there is a slight male predominance.Half of individuals are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. If symptoms are present,they are typically nonspeciﬁc and include fatigue and weight loss. Occasionally patients
FIGURE III-47 Site of action of antiplatelet drugs. Aspirin inhibits thromboxane A2 (TXA2) synthesis by
irreversibly acetylating cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1). Reduced TXA2 release attenuates platelet activation and
recruitment to the site of vascular injury. Ticlopidine and clopidogrel irreversibly block P2Y12, a key ADP
receptor on the platelet surface. Therefore, these agents also attenuate platelet recruitment. Abciximab, ep-
tiﬁbatide, and tiroﬁban inhibit the ﬁnal common pathway of platelet aggregation by blocking ﬁbrinogen
binding to activated glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa.Collagen
TXA2COX-1
ADPvWFPlaque Disruption
Platelet adhesion and secretion
Platelet recruitment and activation
GPIIb/IIIa activation
Platelet aggregationX
X
XAspirin
Ticlopidine
Clopidogrel
Abciximab
Eptifibatide
Tirofiban
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 85
will have symptoms related to splenic enlargement such as early satiety and left upper
quadrant pain. Laboratory ﬁndings are suggestive of CML. A high leukocyte count of100,000/µL is typical, with a predominant granulocytic differential, including neutro-phils, myelocytes, metamyelocytes, and band forms. The circulating blast count shouldbe <5%. Anemia and thrombocytosis are also common. The bone marrow demonstratesnonspeciﬁc increase in cellularity with an increase in the myeloid to erythroid ratio. Thedeﬁnitive diagnosis of CML is usually made by demonstrating the presence of the Phila-delphia chromosome, a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22. Thiscytogenetic abnormality is present in 90–95% of individuals with CML and can be foundby ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) or by cytogenetics. This translocation resultsin the fusion of the bcr gene with the abl gene. The bcr-abl fusion protein results in con-
stitutive activation of abl tyrosine kinase enzyme that prevents apoptosis and leads to in-creased survival of the cells containing the mutation. Ultimately, untreated CMLdevelops into an accelerated phase with increasing numbers of mutations and leads toacute blast crisis. The deletion of the long arm of chromosome 5 is present in some acutemyeloid leukemias and is associated with older age at diagnosis. The inversion of chro-mosome 16 is typically present in acute myelomonocytic leukemia (M4 subtype). Thetranslocation of the long arms of chromosomes 15 and 17 is the mutation associated withacute promyelocytic anemia that results in arrest of cellular differentiation that can betreated with pharmacologic doses of ATRA. Finally, trisomy 12 is one of several muta-tions that may result in the development of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
III-49. The answer is D.   (Chap. 70)   In a young person with no family history and without
signs or symptoms suggesting a bleeding colonic lesion, colon cancer would be very un-likely. Similarly, although peptic ulcer disease and celiac sprue can cause iron deﬁciencyby hemorrhage and malabsorption, respectively, he has neither symptoms nor stool ﬁnd-ings consistent with gastrointestinal blood loss. Impaired iron absorption is commonlycaused by dietary composition. High amounts of calcium or lead or the lack of ascorbicacid or amino acids in the meal can impair iron absorption. Calcium can cause a sub-stantial decrease in iron absorption. This patient should be advised to make sure he doesnot take his iron tablet at the same time as his calcium tablet.
III-50. The answer is D.   (Chap. 92)   T esticular cancer occurs most commonly in the second
and third decades of life. The treatment depends on the underlying pathology and thestage of the disease. Germ cell tumors are divided into seminomatous and nonsemi-nomatous subtypes. Although the pathology of this patient’s tumor was seminoma, thepresence of AFP is suggestive of occult nonseminomatous components. If there are anynonseminomatous components, the treatment follows that of a nonseminomatous germcell tumor. This patient therefore has a clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tu-mor. As his AFP returned to normal after orchiectomy, there is no obvious occult disease.However, between 20 and 50% of these patients will have disease in the retroperitoneallymph nodes. Because numerous trials have indicated no survival difference in this co-hort between observation and RPLND and because of the potential side effects ofRPLND, either approach is reasonable. Radiation therapy is the appropriate choice forstage I and stage II seminoma. It has no role in nonseminomatous lesions. Adjuvant che-motherapy is not indicated in early-stage testicular cancer. Hormonal therapy is effectivefor prostate cancer and receptor positive breast cancer but has no role in testicular cancer.PET scan has no currently deﬁned clinical role.
III-51. The answer is C.   (Chap. 78)   T obacco use is the most modiﬁable risk factor for cardio-
vascular disease, respiratory disease, and cancer. Smokers have a 33% lifetime chance of dy-ing from a smoking-related cause. While tobacco is associated with more cardiovasculardeaths than cancer deaths, it is associated with malignancies in the mouth, lung, esophagus,kidney, bladder, pancreas, and stomach. The degree of smoke exposure as well as the degreeof inhalation is correlated with risk of lung cancer mortality. Smokeless tobacco is the fast-est growing part of the tobacco industry and carries with it a substantial risk for dental andgingival disease as well as oral and esophageal cancers. Most American smokers begin be-
86 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
fore 18 years of age. The COMMIT trial showed that a cessation message and cessation pro-
grams were effective for light tobacco smokers, whereas heavy smokers were more likely toneed counseling, behavioral strategies, or pharmacologic adjuncts. Most Americans whoquit smoking cigarettes, however, do so without involvement in a cessation program.
III-52. The answer is B.   (Chap. 95)   The patient is a young man with asymmetric hilar ade-
nopathy. The differential diagnosis would include lymphoma, testicular cancer, and, lesslikely, tuberculosis or histoplasmosis. Because of his young age, testicular examinationand ultrasonography would be indicated, as would measurement of β-hCG and AFP ,
which are generally markedly elevated. In men with carcinoma of unknown primarysource, AFP and β-hCG should be checked as the presence of testicular cancer portends
an improved prognosis compared with possible primary sources. Biopsy would showlymphoma. The ACE level may be elevated but is not diagnostic of sarcoidosis. Thyroiddisorders are not likely to present with unilateral hilar adenopathy. Finally, PSA is not in-dicated in this age category, and C-reactive protein would not differentiate any of the dis-orders mentioned above. Biopsy is the most important diagnostic procedure.
III-53. The answer is A.   (Chap. 85)   Approximately 20% of all lung cancers are small-cell can-
cers. These tumors tend to present centrally, be derived from neuroendocrine tissues, andbe much more chemo-and radiosensitive than non-small cell cancer. Histologic subtypes ofnon-small cell cancer include adenocarcinoma (which has a more often peripheral presen-tation), large cell cancer, bronchoalveolar cell cancer, and squamous cell (or bronchogenic)lung cancer. All histologic types of lung cancer are associated with smoking. In the relativelyuncommon patient who presents with a small non-small cell primary lesion and no lymphnode involvement, surgery alone may be curative. Patients with small-cell lung cancer aredivided into two staging groups: those with limited disease who have tumors generally con-ﬁned to one hemithorax encompassable by a single radiation port and all others who aresaid to have extensive disease. About 20 percent of patients who present with limited-stagesmall-cell lung cancer are curable with a combination of radiation therapy and chemother-apy, with cisplatin and etoposide being the two most active agents.
III-54. The answer is D.   (Chap. 87)   In the United States, esophageal cancers are either squa-
mous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas. Esophageal cancer is a deadly cancer with avery high mortality rate, regardless of cell type. This is because diagnosis is usually madewell after patients develop symptoms, meaning that the mass is often large with frequentspread to the mediastinum and paraaortic lymph nodes, by the time that endoscopy isconsidered for diagnosis. Smoking and alcohol consumption are synergistic risks forsquamous cell carcinoma, not adenocarcinoma. Other risks for squamous cell carcinomainclude nitrites, smoked opiates, mucosal injury (including ingestion of hot tea), andachalasia. The major risk for adenocarcinoma is chronic gastric reﬂux, gastric metaplasiaof the esophagus (Barrett’s esophagus). These adenocarcinomas account for 60% ofesophageal carcinomas and behave like gastric carcinomas. In recent years, the incidenceof squamous carcinoma of the esophagus has declined while the incidence of adenocarci-noma has increased, particularly in white men. Approximately 10% of esophageal carci-nomas arise in the upper third, 35% in the middle third, and 55% in the lower third.Fewer than 5% of patients with esophageal carcinoma survive 5 years. There is no consis-tent advantage of one cell type over another. Surgery, radiation therapy, and chemother-apy are all options, but usually these interventions are palliative.
III-55. The answer is E.   (Chap. 79)   A small proportion of cancers occur in patients with a ge-
netic predisposition. Roughly 100 syndromes of familial cancer have been reported. Recog-nition allows for genetic counseling and increased cancer surveillance. Down’s syndrome,or trisomy 21, is characterized clinically by a variety of features, including moderate to se-vere learning disability, facial and musculoskeletal deformities, duodenal atresia, congeni-tal heart defects, and an increased risk of acute leukemia. Fanconi’s anemia is a conditionthat is associated with defects in DNA repair. There is a higher incidence of cancer, withleukemia and myelodysplasia being the most common cancers. Von Hippel–Lindau syn-drome is associated with hemangioblastomas, renal cysts, pancreatic cysts and carcinomas,
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 87
and renal cell cancer. Neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) type I and type II are both associated with
increased tumor formation. NF II is more associated with a schwannoma. Both carry a riskof malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Fragile X is a condition associated with chro-mosomal instability of the X chromosome. These patients have mental retardation, typicalmorphologic features including macroorchidism and prognathia, behavioral problems,and occasionally seizures. Increased cancer incidence has not been described.
III-56. The answer is E.   (Chap. 103)   Thrombocytosis may be “primary” or “secondary.” Es-
sential thrombocytosis is a myeloproliferative disorder that involves a multipotent hema-topoietic progenitor cell. Unfortunately, there is no clonal marker that can reliablydistinguish it from more common nonclonal, reactive forms of thrombocytosis. There-fore, the diagnosis is one of exclusion. Common causes of secondary thrombocytosis in-clude infection, inﬂammatory conditions, malignancy, iron deﬁciency, hemorrhage, andpostsurgical states. Other myeloproliferative disorders, such as CML and myeloﬁbrosis,may result in thrombocytosis. Similarly, myelodysplastic syndromes, particularly the 5q-syndrome, may cause thrombocytosis. Pernicious anemia caused by vitamin B
12 deﬁ-
ciency does not typically cause thrombocytosis. However, correction of B 12 deﬁciency or
folate deﬁciency may cause a “rebound” thrombocytosis. Similarly, cessation of chronicethanol use may also cause a rebound thrombocytosis.
III-57. The answer is A.   (Chap. 111)   
D-Dimer is a degradation product of cross-linked ﬁbrin
and is elevated in conditions of ongoing thrombosis. Low concentrations of D-dimer are
considered to indicate the absence of thrombosis. Patients over the age of 70 will frequentlyhave elevated 
D-dimers in the absence of thrombosis, making this test less predictive of acute
disease. Clinical symptoms are often not present in patients with DVT and do not affect in-terpretation of a 
D-dimer. T obacco use, while frequently considered a risk factor for DVT,
and previous DVT should not affect the predictive value of D-dimer. Homan’s sign, calf pain
elicited by dorsiﬂexion of the foot, is not predictive of DVT and is unrelated to D-dimer.
III-58. The answer is E.   (Chap. 61)   Many drugs can lead to neutropenia, most commonly via
retarding neutrophil production in the bone marrow. Of the list above, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the most likely culprit. Other common causes of drug-induced neutro-penia include alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide or busulfan, antimetabolitesincluding methotrexate and 5-ﬂucytosine, penicillin and sulfonamide antibiotics, anti-thyroid drugs, antipsychotics, and anti-inﬂammatory agents. Prednisone, when usedsystemically, often causes an increase in the circulating neutrophil count as it leads todemargination of neutrophils and bone marrow stimulation. Ranitidine, an H
2 blocker, is a
well-described cause of thrombocytopenia but has not been implicated in neutropenia.Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor whose main side effects in-clude a morbilliform rash and central nervous system effects including strange dreams andconfusion. The presence of these symptoms does not require drug cessation. Darunavir is anew protease inhibitor that is well tolerated. Common side effects include a maculopapularrash and lipodystrophy, a class effect for all protease inhibitors.
III-59. The answer is E.   (Chap. 87)   Although esophageal masses and cancer can lead to several
types of dysphagia, the most common complaint is solid food dysphagia that worsens tothe point that liquids are also hard to swallow. Such a complaint warrants upper endos-copy, particularly if the patient falls in a high-risk group for esophageal cancer, with care-ful examination of the stomach, trachea, and larynx. Odynophagia with chest pain ismore reminiscent of ulcerative disease of the esophagus due to either infection, such ascytomegalovirus or Candida , or pill esophagitis. Spasm causes severe pain as well, but
this may occur independent of swallowing. Liquid phase dysphagia often implies a func-tional disorder of the esophagus rather than a mass-like obstruction. A barium swallow-ing study or cine-esophagram in conjunction with a thorough history and physicalexamination may prove diagnostic. Oropharyngeal dysphagia usually localizes diseasequite speciﬁcally to the oropharynx. Early satiety is often due to gastric obstruction or ex-trinsic compression of the stomach (splenomegaly is a common reason for this), or to afunctional gastric disorder such as gastroparesis.
88 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
III-60. The answer is C.   (Chap. 105)   Hepatitis B and C are both common causes of cirrhosis
and are strongly associated with the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatitis C,
but not hepatitis B, can also lead to a lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, often in the spleen,that resolves with cure of hepatitis C. Other infections are commonly implicated as causesof lymphoma. Epstein-Barr virus has been associated with a large number of lymphoid ma-lignancies including posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD), Hodgkin’s disease,central nervous system lymphoma, and Burkitt’s lymphoma. H. pylori  is necessary and suf-
ﬁcient for gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma development, and curecan be achieved with eradication of the organism in some cases. HHV8 is a known cause ofbody cavity lymphoma, including primary pleural lymphoma. Celiac sprue has been asso-ciated with gastrointestinal tract lymphoma. Many collagen vascular diseases and theirtreatments (tumor necrosis factor α inhibitors) have also been associated with lymphomas,
as have acquired and inherited immunodeﬁciencies.
III-61. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 102 and 103)   Chronic idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis is a clonal dis-
order of a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell of unknown etiology that is charac-terized by marrow ﬁbrosis, myeloid metaplasia, extramedullary hematopoiesis, andsplenomegaly. The peripheral blood smear reﬂects the features of extramedullary hema-topoiesis, with teardrop-shaped red cells, immature myeloid cells, and abnormal plate-lets. Leukocytes and platelets may both be elevated. The median survival is poor at only 5years. These patients eventually succumb to increasing organomegaly, infection, and pos-sible transformation to acute leukemia. There is no speciﬁc therapy for chronic idio-pathic myelobrosis. Erythropoietin has not been shown to be consistently effective andmay exacerbate splenomegaly. Supportive care with red blood cell transfusions is neces-sary as anemia worsens. Chemotherapy has no role in changing the natural history of thedisease. Some newer agents, such as interferon and thalidomide, may play a role, but theirplace is not clear. Splenectomy may be necessary in symptomatic patients with massivesplenomegaly. However, extramedullary hematopoiesis may worsen with reboundthrombocytosis and compensatory hepatomegaly. The only potential curative modality isallogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Morbidity and mortality are high, particularlyin older patients. In light of this patient’s young age and the presence of three healthy sib-lings, HLA matching of her siblings is the most reasonable step.
III-62. The answer is D.   (Chap. 98)   Iron deﬁciency anemia is a condition in which there is
anemia and clear evidence of iron deﬁciency. Initially, a state of negative iron balance oc-curs during which iron stores become slowly depleted. Serum ferritin may decrease, andthe presence of stainable iron on bone marrow preparation decreases. When iron storesare depleted, serum iron begins to fall. TIBC starts to increase, reﬂecting the presence ofcirculating unbound transferrin. Once the transferrin saturation falls to 15 to 20%, he-moglobin synthesis is impaired. The peripheral blood smear reveals the presence of mi-crocytic and hypochromic red cells. Reticulocytes may also become hypochromic.Reticulocyte numbers are reduced relative to the level of anemia, reﬂecting a hypopro-duction anemia secondary to iron deﬁciency. Clinically, these patients exhibit the usualsigns of anemia: fatigue, pallor, and reduced exercise capacity. Cheilosis and koilonychiaare signs of advanced tissue iron deﬁciency. Some patients may experience pica, a desireto ingest certain materials, such as ice (pagophagia) and clay (geophagia).
III-63. The answer is D.   (Chap. 67)   Regardless of the source of stem cells used in regenerative
strategies, a number of generic and speciﬁc problems must be overcome before successfulclinical applications are available. Embryonic stem cells tend to develop abnormal karyo-types and have the potential to form teratomas. Umbilical cord blood stem cells have lessgraft-versus-host disease than marrow-derived stem cells and are less likely to be contam-inated by the herpes virus. Organ-speciﬁc multipotent stem cells are easy to isolate fromthe marrow but are difﬁcult to isolate from tissues such as the heart and brain. Earlystudies of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells have shown that the transplanted cellsfuse with cells resident in the organ.
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 89
III-64. The answer is B.   (Chap. 58)   The ﬁrst step in diagnosing polycythemia vera is to docu-
ment an elevated red blood cell (RBC) mass. A normal RBC mass suggests spurious polycy-
themia. Next, serum erythropoietin (EPO) levels should be measured. If EPO levels are low,the diagnosis is polycythemia vera. Conﬁrmatory tests include JAK-2 mutation analysis, leu-kocytosis, and thrombocytosis. Elevated EPO levels are seen in the normal physiologic re-sponse to hypoxia as well as in autonomous production of EPO. Further steps in the workupinclude evaluation for hypoxia with an arterial blood gas, consideration of smoker’s polycy-themia (elevated carboxyhemoglobin levels) and disorders of increased hemoglobin afﬁnityfor oxygen. Low serum EPO levels with low oxygen saturation suggest inadequate renal pro-duction (renal failure). High RBC mass and high EPO levels with normal oxygen saturationmay be seen with autonomous EPO production, such as in renal cell carcinoma.
III-65. The answer is E.   (Chap. 352)   Any increase in hepatic iron will exacerbate PCT, and ef-
forts should be made to minimize iron overload. The ﬁrst step in management of PCT isto identify and discontinue any potential trigger (alcohol, estrogens, iron supplements).PCT that does not respond to these conservative measures requires weekly phlebotomywith the goal of reducing hepatic iron. In the above case, conservative measures have notled to remission and phlebotomy is necessary. Serum ferritin can be used as a gauge ofhepatic iron overload and should guide the course of phlebotomy. Iron infusion or oraliron supplementation would result in an exacerbation of PCT by increasing iron stores.Hydroxyurea is used to treat sickle cell disease and some forms of essential thrombocyto-sis; it has no role in the primary management of PCT.
III-66. The answer is E.   (Chap. 101)   Hemolytic anemias may be classiﬁed as intracorpuscular or
extracorpuscular. In intracorpuscular disorders, the patient’s red blood cells (RBCs) have anabnormally short life span due to an intrinsic RBC factor. In extracorpuscular disorders, theRBC has a short life span due to a nonintrinsic RBC factor. Thrombotic thrombocytopenicpurpura (TTP) is an acquired disorder where red cell and platelet destruction occur not be-cause of defects of these cell lines, but rather as a result of microangiopathy leading to de-structive shear forces on the cells. Other clinical sign and symptoms include fever, mentalstatus change, and, less commonly, renal impairment. All cases of hemolysis in conjunctionwith thrombocytopenia should be rapidly ruled out for TTP by evaluation of a peripheralsmear for schistocytes as plasmapheresis is life-saving. Other causes of extravascularhemolytic anemia include hypersplenism, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, disseminated in-travascular coagulation, and other microangiopathic hemolytic anemias. The other fourdisorders listed in the question all refer to some defect of the red blood cell itself that leads tohemolysis. Elliptocytosis is a membranopathy that leads to varying degrees of destruction ofthe red cell in the reticuloendothelial system. Sickle cell anemia is a congenital hemoglobin-opathy classiﬁed by recurrent pain crises and numerous long-term sequelae that is due to awell-deﬁned β globin mutation. Pyruvate kinase deﬁciency is a rare disorder of the glyco-
lytic pathway that causes hemolytic anemia. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)is a form of acquired hemolysis due to an intrinsic abnormality of the red cell. It also oftencauses thrombosis and cytopenias. Bone marrow failure is a feared association with PNH.
III-67. The answer is B.   (Chap. 67)   There are many attractive targets for which to use stem
cells as regenerative therapies (e.g., myocardial infarction, type I diabetes, Parkinson’sdisease). All of the other options represent a few of the obstacles that are yet to be over-come. Stem cell therapies raise important questions about the deﬁnition of human lifeand have raised issues of justice and safety regarding the care of patients. It is clear thatthe resolution of these ethical issues will require multidisciplinary discussion betweenscientists, physicians, patients, lawmakers, and the general public.
III-68. The answer is C.   (Chap. 112)   Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is common in
patients who receive heparin products. Because the risk of death is signiﬁcantly increasedin patients with HIT type II and thrombosis if no anticoagulation is given, observation orsimply discontinuation of heparin is not an option. Although enoxaparin and other low-molecular-weight heparins have less of a propensity to cause HIT, they are cross-reactivein patients who already have HIT and thus are contraindicated. Direct thrombin inhibi-
90 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
tors are the treatment of choice. Lepirudin is a recombinant direct thrombin inhibitor. It
may be given intravenously or subcutaneously. It is excreted through the kidney and lacksan antidote. Therefore, it is relatively contraindicated in patients with renal insufﬁciency.Argatroban is another direct thrombin inhibitor. Because it is hepatically metabolized, it isa reasonable option in patients with HIT and renal insufﬁciency.
III-69. The answer is B.   (Chap. 105)   Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia
are common, and a peripheral blood smear and a Coomb’s test help evaluate their pres-ence. Hypersplenism is also seen in CLL as the spleen sequesters large numbers of circu-lating blood cells and enlarges. Hence, a careful left upper quadrant examination lookingfor a palpable splenic tip is the standard of care in this situation. This patient is at risk ofhepatic decompensation as well, given his hepatitis C that can also cause anemia andthrombocytopenia. Bone marrow inﬁltration of tumor cells can lead to cytopenias inCLL. However, this is in effect a diagnosis of exclusion. Once these three possibilities areruled out, a bone marrow biopsy is a reasonable next step. This initial evaluation beforepresuming spread of CLL is critical for therapy because each possibility will require dif-ferent therapy (glucocorticoids or retuximab for hemolysis, hepatology referral for liverfailure, and splenectomy for symptomatic hypersplenism).
III-70. The answer is A.   (Chap. 88)   Currently hepatocellular carcinoma can be staged using a
variety of staging systems. The TNM system set up by the American Joint Commission forCancer has been largely replaced by either the Okuda system or the Cancer of the Liver Ital-ian Program (CLIP) system because these systems include the presence of cirrhosis as a partof staging. This patient would have stage II disease by the TNM system because he has a sin-gle tumor >2 cm but without evidence of vascular invasion. By the CLIP system, the patientwould be classiﬁed as CLIP stage I because of the presence of Child-Pugh class B cirrhosis.Primary surgical resection of a solitary mass is reserved for those individuals with stage I orII HCC or CLIP stage 0. However, because of the high rate of liver failure and mortality fol-lowing surgical resection in individuals with Child-Pugh class B or C cirrhosis, these indi-viduals are not candidates for surgical resection. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLTX) isthe treatment of choice in individuals with stage I or II disease and cirrhosis. Individualscan be referred for OLTX if there is a single mass <5 cm or three masses <3 cm and no vas-cular invasion is present. Radiofrequency ablation uses heat to cause necrosis of an ~7 cmzone in a non-speciﬁc manner. This technique can be used effectively in single lesions thatare 3–4 cm in size. However, tumors located near the main portal pedicles can lead to bileduct injury and obstruction. Percutaneous ethanol injection (not listed) results in necrosisof the injected area and requires multiple injections. The maximum size of tumor that canbe treated with percutaneous ethanol injection is 3 cm. Transarterial chemoembolization isa form of regional chemotherapy in which a variety of chemotherapeutic agents are directlyinjected into the hepatic artery. Two randomized trials have shown a survival advantage fortransarterial chemoembolization in a highly selected subset of patients. The technique isrecommended for individuals who are not candidates for orthotopic liver transplantation,including individuals with multiple medical comorbidities, more than four lesions, lymphnode metastases, tumors >5 cm, and gross vascular invasion. Systemic chemotherapy hasno effect on survival and has a <25% response rate. It is not recommended for most indi-viduals with HCC. Sorafenib is a novel agent that increases median survival from 6 monthsto 9 months in patients with advanced disease.
III-71. The answer is A.   (Chap. 87)   A strong family history of colon cancer should prompt con-
sideration for hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), or Lynch syndrome partic-ularly if diffuse polyposis is not
 noted on colonoscopy. HNPCC is characterized by
(1) three or more relatives w ith histologically proven colorectal cancer, one of whom is a
ﬁrst-degree relative and of the other two, at least one with the diagnosis before age 50; and(2) colorectal cancer in at least two generations. The disease is an autosomal dominant traitand is associated with other tumors, including in the endometrium and ovary. The proxi-mal colon is most frequently involved, and cancer occurs with a median age of 50 years, 15years earlier than in sporadic colon cancer. Patients with HNPCC are recommended to re-
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 91
ceive biennial colonoscopy and pelvic ultrasound beginning at age 25. Innumerable polyps
suggest the presence of one of the autosomal dominant polyposis syndromes, many ofwhich carry a high malignant potential. These include familial adenomatous polyposis,Gardner’s syndrome (associated with osteomas, ﬁbromas, epidermoid cysts), or Turcot’ssyndrome (associated with brain cancer). Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is associated with mu-cocutaneous pigmentation and hamartomas. Tumors may develop in the ovary, breast,pancreas, and endometrium; however, malignant colon cancers are not common. Ulcer-ative colitis is strongly associated with development of colon cancer, but it is unusual forcolon cancer to be the presenting ﬁnding in ulcerative colitis. Patients are generally symp-tomatic from their inﬂammatory bowel disease long before cancer risk develops.
III-72. The answer is E.   (Chap. 105)   Classical Hodgkin’s disease carries a better prognosis than
all types of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Patients with good prognostic factors can achievecure with extended ﬁeld radiation alone, while those with higher risk disease often achievecure with high-dose chemotherapy and sometimes radiation. The chance of cure is so high(>90%) that many protocols are now considering long-term sequelae of current therapysuch as carcinomas, hypothyroidism, premature coronary disease, and constrictive peri-carditis in those receiving radiation therapy. Combination chemotherapy with ABVD ap-pears to be the form of treatment with the lowest risk of late fatal complications.
III-73. The answer is B.   (Chap. 111)   Fibrinogen is a 340-kDa dimeric molecule made up of
two sets of three covalently linked polypeptide chains. Thrombin cleaves multiple pep-tides to produce ﬁbrin monomer that factor XIII stabilizes by cross-linking. Although ﬁ-brinogen is needed for platelet aggregation and ﬁbrin formation, even severe ﬁbrinogendeﬁciency such as aﬁbrinogenemia produces mild, rare bleeding episodes, most often af-ter surgery. Dysﬁbrinogenemia refers to a constellation of disorders that involve muta-tions that alter the release of ﬁbrinopeptides, affect the rate of polymerization of ﬁbrinmonomers, or alter the sites of ﬁbrin cross-linking. Dysﬁbrinogenemia is either inheritedin an autosomal dominant fashion or acquired. Patients with liver disease, hepatomas,AIDS, and lymphoproliferative disorders may develop an acquired form of dysﬁbrino-genemia. The presence of altered partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and prothrombintime (PT)/INR reﬂects an abnormality in coagulation from the prothrombinase complexdownstream to ﬁbrin. Correction with a mixing study eliminates factor inhibition as acause of the coagulation disorder. Other causes of prolongation of the PT and PTT in-clude factor deﬁciencies in factor V or X, aﬁbrinogenemia or dysﬁbrinogenemia, andconsumption of coagulation factors from DIC. The absence of schistocytes from theblood smear makes DIC unlikely. The thrombin time tests the interaction with thrombindirectly on ﬁbrinogen. Its prolongation indicates an abnormality with that interactionand suggests a diagnosis of dysﬁbrinogenemia. Factor XIII deﬁciency is a bleeding disor-der that manifests in childhood and is not consistent with this presentation.
III-74. The answer is C.   (Chap. 78)   Chemoprevention involves the use of speciﬁc natural or
synthetic chemical agents to reverse, suppress, or prevent carcinogenesis before the devel-opment of invasive malignancy. Calcium, by binding to luminal free fatty acids and bile,may reduce gastrointestinal endothelium proliferation. Calcium supplementation decreasesthe risk of adenomatous polyps by up to 20%. Trials with cancer-incidence endpoints arecurrently underway. High doses of relatively toxic isotretinoin caused regression of the pre-malignant oral leukoplakia lesions; however, lower doses were not effective in preventinghead and neck cancers. It also did not prevent second malignancies in patients cured ofearly stage non-small cell lung cancer. β-Carotene has been investigated for the chemopre-
vention of lung cancer in two trials. Both trials actually showed harm from β-carotene. As-
pirin had no effect on colon cancer incidence in a 6-year trial. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitorshave been shown to reduce recurrence rates for polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis.The effects on colon cancer in sporadic cases were initiated, but were complicated by the as-sociation of these drugs with increased cardiovascular death. Tamoxifen is used for primaryprevention of breast cancer among those at very high risk. It is associated with a small in-crease in the risk of endometrial cancer.
92 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
III-75.  and.  III-76. The answers are A and E.   (Chap. 104)   Treatment of acute promyelocytic leu-
kemia (PML) is an interesting example of how understanding the function of the protein
produced by the genetic abnormality can be utilized to develop a treatment for the disease.The translocation of the long arms of chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17), results in the pro-duction of a chimeric protein called promyelocytic leukemia (Pml)/retinoic acid receptorα (Rarα ). The Pml-Rarα  fusion protein suppresses gene transcription and arrests differ-
entiation of the cells in an immature state leading to promyelocytic leukemia. Pharmaco-logic doses of the ligand of the Rar- α receptor, all- trans -retinoic acid (ATRA), stimulate
the cells to resume differentiation. With use of ATRA, the leukemic cells differentiate tomature neutrophils and undergo subsequent apoptosis. This leads to treatment and remis-sion of PML without causing the myelosuppression that is common to other chemother-apy used for treatment of leukemia. While ATRA alone can yield hematologic remission ofPML, it is most often combined with traditional chemotherapeutic agents in order to gen-erate a cytogenetic remission as well. Since introduction of ATRA into therapy of PML,complete remission and survival rates have further improved to about 75–80% at 5 years.The primary side effect of ATRA is the development of retinoic acid syndrome. The onsetof retinoic acid syndrome from ATRA is usually within the ﬁrst 3 weeks of treatment. Typ-ical symptoms are chest pain, fever, and dyspnea. Hypoxia is common, and chest radiogra-phy usually shows diffuse alveolar inﬁltrates with pleural effusions. Pericardial effusionsmay also occur. The cause of retinoic acid syndrome is possibly related to the adhesion ofthe differentiated leukemia cells to the pulmonary endothelium or the release of cytokinesby these cells to cause vascular leak. Mortality of retinoic acid syndrome is 10%. High-dose glucocorticoid therapy is usually effective in treatment of retinoic acid syndrome. Ar-senic trioxide is currently indicated for the treatment of relapsed PML and is effective inup to 85% of individuals who are refractory to ATRA. Ongoing clinical trials are attempt-ing to determine if combination therapy with ATRA and arsenic may further improve out-comes in PML. Cyclophosphamide, daunorubicin, vinblastine, and prednisone are theconstituents of the combination chemotherapy commonly known as CHOP , and it is indi-cated for the treatment of B cell lymphomas. Rituximab is most commonly used as a treat-ment of B cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and is currently under investigation for thetreatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and a variety of refractory autoimmune disor-ders, including systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. Rituximab is amonoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 cell surface molecule of B lymphocytes.Neither of these drug regimens has a role in the treatment of myeloid leukemias. Whole-body irradiation is used primarily before bone marrow transplant to ensure completeeradication of cancerous leukemic cells in the bone marrow.
III-77. The answer is C.   (Chap. 104)   Patients with acute leukemia frequently present with non-
speciﬁc symptoms of fatigue and weight loss. In addition, weight loss and anorexia are alsocommon. About half have had symptoms for >3 months at the time of presentation. Feveris present in only about 10% of patients at presentation, and 5% have evidence of abnor-mal hemostasis. On physical examination, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, sternal tender-ness, and evidence of infection or hemorrhage are common presenting signs. Laboratorystudies are conﬁrmatory with evidence of anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukocytosisoften present. The median presenting leukocyte count at presentation is 15,000/ µL. About
20–40% will have presenting leukocyte counts of <5000/ µL, and another 20% will have
counts >100,000/ µL. Review of the peripheral smear conﬁrms leukemia in most cases. If
Auer rods are seen, the diagnosis of AML is virtually certain. Thrombocytopenia (plateletcount <100,000/ µL) is seen in >75% of individuals with AML. Once the diagnosis of AML
has been conﬁrmed, rapid evaluation and treatment should be undertaken. The overallhealth of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, and renal systems should be evaluated aschemotherapy has adverse effects that may cause organ dysfunction in any of these sys-tems. Among the prognostic factors that predict poor outcomes in AML, age at diagnosisis one of the most important because individuals of advanced age tolerate induction che-motherapy poorly. In addition, advanced age is more likely to be associated with multiplechromosomal abnormalities that predict poorer response to chemotherapy, althoughsome chromosomal markers predict a better response to chemotherapy. Poor perfor-
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 93
mance status independent of age also decreases survival in AML. Chromosome ﬁndings
at diagnosis are also very important in predicting outcomes in AML. Responsiveness tochemotherapy and survival are also worse if the leukocyte count >100,000/ µL or the ante-
cedent course of symptoms is prolonged. Anemia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopeniapresent for >3 months is a poor prognostic indicator. However, there is no absolute degreeof anemia or thrombocytopenia that predicts worse outcomes.
III-78. The answer is C.   (Chap. 78)   The sensitivity of a test is a numerical description of the
test’s ability to detect the disease when it is present. It is the proportion of persons withthe condition who also test positive. In this example, 1000 people test positive using thescreening test. The number of persons who actually have the condition is 1250, yieldingan 80% sensitivity.
III-79. The answer is B.   (Chap. 78; NEJM 349:2191, 2003)   For colon cancer screening, the
three major preventive societies (i.e., American Cancer Society, The United States Preven-tive Services Task Force, and the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care) recom-mend sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, or fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) starting at 50 yearsof age. Digital rectal examination is not recommended. FOBT has a high false-positive rate;2–10% of those with a positive result have colon cancer, and ~25% have adenomas. Sig-moidoscopy has been shown to reduce mortality, and the recommended screening intervalis 5 years. Sigmoidoscopy carries a perforation risk of 1/1000, while the risk with colonos-copy is three times greater. Colonoscopy detects more advanced lesions and is the screeningtest of choice in subjects who are at high-risk. Virtual colonoscopy using CT imaging candetect adenomatous polyps, compares favorably with endoscopic colonoscopy for polyps>8 mm in size, and may be an effective screening method in average-risk adults. It is not assensitive as endoscopic colonoscopy for small (<5 mm) polyps.
III-80. The answer is C.   (Chap. 270)   Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome is the clinical mani-
festation of superior vena cava obstruction with severe reduction in venous return fromthe head, neck, and upper extremities. Small cell and squamous cell lung cancer accountfor 85% of all cases of malignant superior vena cava obstruction. Common complaintsinclude neck and facial swelling with dyspnea. Other symptoms include hoarseness,tongue swelling, headaches, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hemoptysis, dysphagia, pain, diz-ziness, syncope, and lethargy. T emporizing measures include diuretics, low-salt diet, oxy-gen, and head elevation. Glucocorticoids may be effective for shrinking the size oflymphomatous masses, but they are of no beneﬁt in patients with primary lung cancer.Radiation therapy is the primary treatment for SVC syndrome due to non-small cell lungcancer. Chemotherapy is most effective for small cell lung cancer, lymphoma, or germcell tumors. Some non-small cell lung tumors are responsive to novel chemotherapyagents. Intravascular stenting is effective for palliation and may be considered to preventrecurrence.
III-81. The answer is D.   (Chap. 104)   Acute myeloid leukemias (AML) are a group of hemato-
logic malignancies derived from hematologic stem cells that have acquired chromosomalmutations that prevent differentiation into mature myeloid cells. The speciﬁc chromoso-mal abnormalities predict in which stage of differentiation the cell is arrested and are asso-ciated with the several subtypes of AML that have been identiﬁed. In the United States,>16,000 new cases of AML are diagnosed yearly, and the numbers of new cases of AML hasincreased in the past 10 years. Men are diagnosed with AML more frequently than women(4.6 cases per 100,000 population vs. 3.0 cases per 100,000). In addition, older age is asso-ciated with increased incidence of AML, with an incidence of 18.6 cases per 100,000 popu-lation in those >65 years. AML is uncommon in adolescents. Other known risk factors fordevelopment of AML include hereditary genetic abnormalities, radiation and chemical ex-posures, and drugs. The most common hereditary abnormality linked to AML is trisomy21 (Down syndrome). Other hereditary syndromes associated with an increase of AML in-clude diseases associated with defective DNA repair such as Fanconi anemia and ataxia tel-angiectasia. Survivors of the atomic bomb explosions in Japan were found to have a highincidence of AML as have survivors of other high-dose radiation exposures. However,
94 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
therapeutic radiation is not associated with an increased risk of AML unless the patient
was also treated concomitantly with alkylating agents. Anticancer drugs are the most com-mon causes of drug-associated AML. Of the chemotherapeutic agents, alkylating agentsand topoisomerase II inhibitors are the drugs most likely to be associated with AML.
III-82. The answer is B.   (Chap. 95)   Patients with cancer from an unknown primary site
present a common diagnostic dilemma. Initial evaluation should include history, physi-cal examination, appropriate imaging, and blood studies based on gender (e.g., prostate-speciﬁc antigen in men, mammography in women). Immunohistochemical staining ofbiopsy samples using antibodies to speciﬁc cell components may help elucidate the site ofthe primary tumor. Although many immunohistochemical stains are available, a logicalapproach is represented in the ﬁgure below. Additional tests may be helpful based on theappearance under light microscopy and/or the results of the cytokeratin stains. In cases ofcancer of unknown primary, cytokeratin staining is usually the ﬁrst branch point fromwhich the tumor lineage is determined. Cytokeratin is positive in carcinoma, since all ep-ithelial tumors contain this protein. Subsets of cytokeratin, such as CK7 and CK20, maybe useful to determine the likely etiology of the primary tumor. Leukocyte common anti-gen, thyroglobulin, and thyroid transcription factor 1 are characteristic of lymphoma,thyroid cancer, and lung or thyroid cancer, respectively. α Fetoprotein staining is typically
positive in germ cell, stomach, and liver carcinoma.
III-83. The answer is C.   (Chap. 104)   Imatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that acts to
decrease the activity of the bcr-abl fusion protein that results from the reciprocal transloca-tion of chromosomes 9 and 22 (Philadelphia chromosome). It acts as a competitive inhibitorof the abl kinase at its ATP binding site and thus leads to inhibition of tyrosine phosphoryla-tion of proteins in bcr -abl signal transduction. Imatinib mesylate results in hematologic re-
mission in 97% of treated individuals at 18 months and cytogenetic remission of 76%. Thisis compared to traditional chemotherapy of interferon-α  and cytarabine, which resulted in
hematologic remission in 69% and cytogenetic remission in only 14% of individuals. Morethan 87% of individuals who achieved cytogenetic remission had not developed progressivedisease at 5 years. This drug taken orally has limited side effects that include nausea, ﬂuid re-tention, diarrhea, and skin rash and is usually well tolerated. If individuals do not achieve he-matologic remission by 3 months or complete cytogenetic remission by 12 months, it isrecommended that they proceed to allogeneic bone marrow transplant. While imatinib isthe best initial therapy to achieve hematologic and cytogenetic remission, individuals whohave a well-matched related bone marrow donor may proceed to early allogeneic transplant,particularly if the individual is <18 years of age. This is done because younger individualsgenerally have better outcomes following bone marrow transplant than older individuals,and the durability of responses to imatinib mesylate is not known at this time. Interferon- α
was previously the ﬁrst-line chemotherapy if bone marrow transplant was not an option, butit has been replaced by imatinib mesylate. Autologous stem cell transplant is not currentlyused for treatment of CML as there is no reliable way to select residual normal hematopoietic
FIGURE III-82 Approach to cytokeratin (CK7 and CK20) markers used in CUP .CK7     CK20
CK7+     CK20 + CK7+     CK20– CK7–     CK20 + CK7–     CK20–
Urothelial tumors Ovarian mucinous     adenocarcinomaPancreatic     adenocarcinomaCholangiocarcinomaLung adenocarcinomaBreast carcinomaThyroid carcinomaEndometrial carcinomaCervical carcinoma Salivary gland carcinoma CholangiocarcinomaPancreatic carcinomaColorectal carcinoma Merkel cell carcinomaHepatocellular carcinomaRenal cell carcinomaProstate carcinomaSquamous cell and small     cell lung carcinomaHead and neck carcinoma
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 95
progenitor cells. Clinical trials utilizing autologous stem cell transplantation are currently
underway to determine if this treatment may be possible following control of disease withimatinib therapy. Leukopheresis is used for control of leukocyte counts when the patient isexperiencing complications such as respiratory failure or cerebral ischemia related to thehigh white blood cell count.
III-84. The answer is A.   (Chap. 86; Collaborative Group in Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer,
2002.) Approximately 80 to 90% of the variation in breast cancer frequency in different
countries can be attributed to differences in menarche, ﬁrst pregnancy, and menopause.Women who experience menarche at age 16 have 40 to 50% the risk of breast cancer ofwomen who experience menarche at age 12 years. Menopause, surgical or natural, occur-ring 10 years before the median age of 52 years reduces the risk of breast cancer by 35%.Women who have the ﬁrst full-term pregnancy by age 18 have a 30 to 40% reduced risk ofbreast cancer compared with nulliparous women. These data taken together suggest thata substantial portion of the risk of developing breast cancer is related directly to thelength of menstrual life, particularly the fraction occurring before the ﬁrst full-termpregnancy. Independently of these factors, the duration of maternal nursing is associatedwith a reduction in breast cancer risk.
III-85. The answer is D.   (Chap. 110)   The aPTT involves the factors of the intrinsic pathway of
coagulation. Prolongation of the aPTT reﬂects either a deﬁciency of one of these factors(factor VIII, IX, XI, XII, etc.) or inhibition of the activity of one of the factors or compo-nents of the aPTT assay (i.e., phospholipids). This may be further characterized by the“mixing study,” in which the patient’s plasma is mixed with pooled plasma. Correction ofthe aPTT reﬂects a deﬁciency of factors that are replaced by the pooled sample. Failure tocorrect the aPTT reﬂects the presence of a factor inhibitor or phospholipid inhibitor.Common causes of a failure to correct include the presence of heparin in the sample, fac-tor inhibitors (factor VIII inhibitor being the most common), and the presence of an-tiphospholipid antibodies. Factor VII is involved in the extrinsic pathway of coagulation.Inhibitors to factor VII would result in prolongation of the prothrombin time.
III-86. The answer is A.   (Chap. 112)   Aspirin is the most widely used antiplatelet agent world-
wide and is cheap and effective for both primary and secondary prevention of cardiovas-cular disease. Aspirin can be recommended for primary cardiovascular prevention inpatients whose annual estimated risk of a cardiovascular event is >1%. This includes pa-tients over the age of 40 who have two or more major cardiovascular risk factors andpatients over age 50 with one major cardiovascular risk factor. The major risk factors inthis patient who is >50 are diabetes mellitus and family history. Other contributing riskfactors include obesity and a history of tobacco use, although this is not ongoing. Aspirinis equally effective in men and women, and menopausal status does not impact its efﬁ-cacy. However, there is a differential effect of aspirin in men and women. In men, aspirinhas a greater risk reduction on the incidence of myocardial infarction, whereas in women,there is a greater risk reduction in the occurrence of stroke. The most common side effectof aspirin is major bleeding at a rate of 1–3% yearly. Enteric-coated and buffered prepa-rations decrease, but do not eliminate, this risk. The risk of bleeding is higher if adminis-tered concurrently with other anticoagulant or antiplatelet medications. Aspirin does notcause an increased risk of menorrhagia. Finally, aspirin should be used with caution inindividuals with a history of bronchospasm in association with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂam-matory drugs (NSAIDs) or aspirin. Usually, these patients have a history of asthma andnasal polyposis (Samter’s triad). However, this patient reports only gastrointestinal upsetwith ibuprofen. While GI upset is a common adverse reaction with NSAIDs, it does notdenote a true allergy.
III-87. The answer is C.   (Chap. 94)   The most common malignant tumors of bone are plasma
cell tumors related to multiple myeloma. The bone lesions are lytic lesions due to increasedosteoclast activity, without osteoblastic new bone formation. Of the nonhematopoietic tu-mors, the most common are osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, and malig-nant ﬁbrous histiocytoma. Osteosarcomas account for 45% of bone sarcomas and produce
96 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
osteoid (unmineralized bone) or bone. They typically occur in children, adolescents, and
adults to the third decade. The “sunburst” appearance of the lesion and Codman’s trianglein this young man are indicative of an osteosarcoma. Osteosarcomas have a predilectionfor long bones, whereas chondrosarcomas are more often found in ﬂat bones, especiallythe shoulder and pelvic girdles. Osteosarcomas are radioresistant. Long-term survival withcombined chemotherapy and surgery is 60–80%. Chondrosarcomas account for 20–25%of bone sarcomas and are most common in adults in the fourth to sixth decades. They typ-ically present indolently with pain and swelling. They are often difﬁcult to distinguish frombenign bone lesions. Most chondrosarcomas are chemoresistant, and the mainstay of ther-apy is resection of the primary as well as metastatic sites.
III-88. The answer is A.   (Chap. 110)    Hemophilia A results from an inherited deﬁciency of
factor VIII. The gene for factor VIII is on the X chromosome. Therefore, its X-linked in-heritance pattern results in approximately 1 in 10,000 male patients being born withsome level of dysfunction. Clinically, it is characterized by bleeding into soft tissues, mus-cles, and weight-bearing joints. Symptomatic patients usually have levels below 5%.Bleeding occurs hours or days after an injury and can involve any organ. Factor VIII is in-volved in the intrinsic pathway of coagulation. Therefore, deﬁciency usually results in ab-normalities of the activated partial thromboplastin time. Factor VIII has a very shorthalf-life of 8 to 12 h. Therefore, repeated transfusions of plasma, cryoprecipitate, or puri-ﬁed factor VIII must be given at least twice daily. Factor VIII complexes to von Wille-brand factor, not Hageman factor.
III-89. The answer is A.   (Chap. 87)   The rates of gastric cancer have declined signiﬁcantly over
the past 75 years. Nevertheless, there were >20,000 new cases in the United States with>10,000 deaths in 2007. Gastric cancer still has a high incidence in Japan, China, Chile,and Ireland. Epidemiologic evidence, such as the higher prevalence in lower socioeco-nomic groups and the maintenance of risk for individuals but not offspring migratingfrom a high-risk to low-risk environment, suggests an environmental exposure early in lifeis a risk. Risk is associated with ingestion of high nitrite foods. The nitrites may be con-verted to carcinogens by bacteria in partially decayed food. Chronic gastritis and achlorhy-dria due to Helicobacter pylori  gastric infection may contribute to this risk. The effect of H.
pylori  eradication on risk of gastric cancer is under investigation. The combination of rec-
ognition of H. pylori  infection, improved food preservation, and widespread availability of
refrigeration may all be contributing to the declining incidence. The most common histo-logic type of stomach cancer is adenocarcinoma. The majority of adenocarcinomas occurin the distal stomach and appear ulcerative on contrast radiography and endoscopy.Therefore, all gastric ulcers warrant a biopsy and brushings for early detection of adeno-carcinoma of the stomach. Such early lesions have the highest likelihood for surgical cure.Some 13% of gastric adenocarcinomas are diffuse-type, involve most of the stomach, andare referred to as linitis plastica  based on poor distensibility of the stomach. Prognosis for
diffuse carcinomas is worse than for intestinal type, and this disease is seen more com-monly in the young. There is not a good association between this type of gastric cancerand H. pylori  infection. For all adenocarcinomas, the presence of palpable periumbilical
nodes, or Sister Mary Joseph’s nodes, implies metastatic spread and confers a poor prog-nosis. Surgery should be considered ﬁrst-line therapy for cure, or palliation/debulking ifthe patient is a surgical candidate. It is critical to differentiate adenocarcinoma from gas-tric lymphoma as lymphoma carries a much better prognosis, with H. pylori  eradication
causing regression in 75% of cases. Antimicrobial therapy should be considered beforesurgery, radiation, or chemotherapy in gastric lymphoma. Surgery, usually with chemo-therapy, may be curative in 40–60% of patients with resistant or high-grade lymphoma.
III-90. The answer is F .   (Chap. 68)   All peripheral blood cells and some cells in peripheral tis-
sue are derived from hematopoietic stem cells. When hematopoietic stem cells are irre-versibly damaged, as in severe radiation exposure, an individual cannot survive longerthan a few weeks. The two cardinal features of stem cells are the ability to differentiateinto a variety of mature cell types and the capacity for self-renewal. The ability to differ-
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 97
entiate into a variety of cell types allows stem cells to participate in the maintenance and
repair of tissues. In addition, the capacity for self-renewal assures an ongoing supply ofstem cells to continually maintain adequate tissue function. These characteristics are thebasis for the growing excitement regarding the use of stem cells for a wide array of medi-cal conditions including (but limited to) diabetes, spinal cord injury, cardiomyopathy,hematologic disorders, and enzyme deﬁciencies.
III-91. The answer is B.   (Chap. 270)   The malignant spinal cord compression (MSCC) syndrome
is deﬁned as compression of the spinal cord and/or cauda equina by an extradural tumormass. The minimum radiologic evidence for cord compression is compression of the theca atthe level of clinical features. However, radiologic conﬁrmation is not necessary in a patientwhose physical examination suggests cord compression. These patients should receive imme-diate high-dose dexamethasone (24 mg IV every 6 h). Cancers that most commonly cause theMSCC syndrome include prostate, lung, and breast. Renal cell carcinoma, lymphomas andmelanomas may also cause cord compression. The most commonly affected site is the tho-racic spine (70% of cases), followed by the sacral spine (20%). Pain is usually present for daysor months before the neurologic defects manifest. Some 75% percent of patients who are am-bulatory at the time of diagnosis will remain ambulatory, whereas <10% of patients whopresent paraplegic will regain the ability to walk despite treatment.
III-92. The answer is B.   (Chap. 81)   Tumor lysis syndrome is a well recognized clinical entity
that is characterized by metabolic derangements secondary to the destruction of tumorcells. Lysis of cells causes the release of intracellular pools of phosphate, potassium, andnucleic acids, leading to hyperphosphatemia and hyperuricemia. Lactic acidosis fre-quently develops for similar reasons. The increased urine acidity may promote the for-mation of uric acid nephropathy and subsequent renal failure. Hyperphosphatemiapromotes a reciprocal depression in serum calcium. This hypocalcemia may result in se-vere neuromuscular irritability and tetany.
III-93. The answer is E.   (Chap. 111)   The clinical probability of PE can be delineated into likely
vs. unlikely using the clinical decision rule shown in the table below. In those with a score≤4, PE is unlikely and a 
D-dimer test should be performed. A normal D-dimer combined
with an unlikely clinical probability of PE identiﬁes patients who do not need further test-ing or anticoagulation therapy. Those with either a likely clinical probability (score >4) oran abnormal 
D-dimer (with unlikely clinical probability) require an imaging test to rule out
PE. Currently the most attractive imaging method to detect PE is the multislice CT scan. Itis accurate and, if normal, safely rules out PE. This patient has a clinical probability score of4.5 because of her resting tachycardia and the lack of an alternative diagnosis at least aslikely as PE. Therefore, there is no indication for measuring 
D-dimer, and she should pro-
ceed directly to multislice CT of the chest. If this cannot be performed expeditiously, sheshould receive one dose of low-molecular-weight heparin while awaiting the test.
T ABLE III-93, 94 Long-T erm Treatment with Vitamin K Antagonists for Deep V ein 
Thrombosis (DVT) and Pulmonary Embolism (PE)
Patient Categories Duration, months Comments
First episode of DVT or PE secondary 
to a transient (reversible) risk factor3 Recommendation applies to 
both proximal and calf vein 
thrombosis
First episode of idiopathic DVT or PE 6–12 Continuation of anticoagulant 
therapy after 6–12 months may be considered
First episode of DVT or PE with a 
documented thrombophilic abnormality6–12 Continuation of anticoagulant 
therapy after 6–12 months may be considered
First episode of DVT or PE with 
documented antiphospholipid or two or more thrombophilic abnormalities12 Continuation of anticoagulant 
therapy after 12 months may be considered
98 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
III-94. The answer is D.   (Chap. 111)   The goal of treatment with vitamin K antagonists, in-
cluding warfarin, is maintenance of an INR of 2–3, with a goal of 2.5. Higher intensity
treatment is not more effective and has a higher bleeding risk. Lower intensity treatmentis less effective, with a similar bleeding risk. The recommendations for duration of ther-apy for the ﬁrst episode of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE)are shown in the table in the previous question. Generally, recurrent PE/DVT is treatedfor at least 12 months. All treatment decisions require balancing risk of recurrence orlong-term sequelae with bleeding risk as well as patient preference.
III-95. The answer is C.   (Chap. 78)   No study of breast self-examination has shown a reduced
mortality due to breast cancer, despite being associated with higher rates of biopsy. Theprocedure is still recommended as prudent by many organizations; however, only theAmerican Cancer Society recommends monthly BSE in women >19 years. The UnitedStates Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) provides no recommendation for BSE,and the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (CTFPHC) excludes its use as auseful screening technique. A substantial fraction of breast cancers are ﬁrst detected bypatients. Though mortality rates have not declined as a result of BSE, the size of lumpsbeing detected by patients have steadily gotten smaller since the 1990s.
III-96. The answer is D.   (Chap. 86)   Pathologic staging remains the most important determi-
nant of overall prognosis. Other prognostic factors have an impact on survival and thechoice of therapy. Tumors that lack estrogen and/or progesterone receptors are morelikely to recur. The presence of estrogen receptors, particularly in postmenopausalwomen, is also an important factor in determining adjuvant chemotherapy. Tumors witha high growth rate are associated with early relapse. Measurement of the proportion ofcells in S-phase is a measure of the growth rate. Tumors with more than the mediannumber of cells in S-phase have a higher risk of relapse and an improved response rate tochemotherapy. Histologically, tumors with a poor nuclear grade have a higher risk of re-currence than do tumors with a good nuclear grade. At the molecular level, tumors thatoverexpress erbB2  (HER-2/neu ) or that have a mutated p53 gene portend a poorer prog-
nosis for patients. The overexpression of erbB2  is also useful in designing optimal treat-
ment regimens, and a human monoclonal antibody to erbB2  (Herceptin) has been
developed.
III-97. The answer is E.   (Chap. 270)   Tumor lysis syndrome is characterized by hyperuricemia,
hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypocalcemia. Metabolic acidosis occurs fre-quently. Acute renal failure is common, and hemodialysis should be considered early in thetreatment of this problem. Effective cancer therapy kills cells, which release uric acid fromthe turnover of nucleic acids. In an acidic environment, uric acid can precipitate in the re-nal tubules, medulla, and collecting ducts leading to renal failure. Hyperphosphatemia andhyperkalemia also occur as a result of cell death. Hyperphosphatemia produces a reciprocaldepression in serum calcium. Indications for hemodialysis include extreme hyperkalemia(>6.0 meq/L), hyperuricemia (>10 mg/dL), hyperphosphatemia (>10 mg/dL or rapidly in-creasing), or symptomatic hypocalcemia. Daily uric acid levels should be monitored; excel-lent renal recovery can be expected once the uric acid level is <10 mg/dL.
III-98. The answer is B.   (Chap. 112)   Fondaparinux is a direct factor Xa inhibitor that is a syn-
thetic analogue of the pentasaccharide sequence found in heparin. A smaller compoundthan either unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), fonda-parinux acts by binding antithrombin and catalyzing factor Xa inhibition. At only 5 poly-saccharide units, fondaparinux is too small to bridge antithrombin to thrombin and doesnot potentiate thrombin inhibition. Fondaparinux is given by the subcutaneous routeand has 100% bioavailability without plasma protein binding. Like LMWH, it has a pre-dictable anticoagulant effect and monitoring of factor Xa levels is not required. It is ex-creted unchanged in the urine. Fondaparinux is absolutely contraindicated in those witha creatinine clearance of <30 mL/min and should be used with caution in individualswith a creatinine clearance of <50 mL/min. The individual presented in scenario B has acreatinine clearance of 32 mL/min and should not receive fondaparinux.
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 99
Currently, fondaparinux is approved for prophylaxis against venous thromboembolic
disease (VTE) following general surgery and orthopedic procedures. In addition, fonda-
parinux has been shown to be equivalent to heparin and LMWH in initial treatment ofboth deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolus. Recent studies have demon-strated equivalency with enoxaparin in the treatment of non-ST elevation acute coronarysyndromes. Finally, there have been several case reports of successful use of fondaparinuxin the treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia as there is no cross-reactivity be-tween it and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibodies.
The usual dosage of fondaparinux is 7.5 mg once daily. In individuals weighing <50 kg,
the dose should be reduced to 5 mg. Likewise, in those weighing >100 kg, the dose is in-creased to 10 mg.
III-99. The answer is A.   (Chap. 86)   During pregnancy the breast grows under the inﬂuence of
estrogen, progesterone, prolactin, and human placental lactogen. However, the presenceof a dominant breast nodule/mass during pregnancy should never be attributed to hor-monal changes. Breast cancer develops in 1:3000 to 4000 pregnancies. The prognosis forbreast cancer by stage is no different in pregnant compared with pregnant women. Nev-ertheless, pregnant women are often diagnosed with more advanced disease because ofdelay in the diagnosis. Pregnant patients with persistent lumps in the breast should be re-ceive prompt diagnostic evaluation.
III-100. The answer is D.   (Chap. 102)   Aplastic anemia is deﬁned as pancytopenia with bone mar-
row hypocellularity. Aplastic anemia may be acquired, iatrogenic (chemotherapy), or genetic(e.g., Fanconi’s anemia). Acquired aplastic anemia may be due to drugs or chemicals (ex-pected toxicity or idiosyncratic effects), viral infections, immune diseases, paroxysmal noc-turnal hemoglobinuria, pregnancy, or idiopathic causes. Aplastic anemia from idiosyncraticdrug reactions (including those listed as well others including as quinacrine, phenytoin, sul-fonamides, cimetidine) are uncommon but may be encountered given the wide usage ofsome of these agents. In these cases there is usually not a dose-dependent response; the reac-tion is idiosyncratic. Seronegative hepatitis is a cause of aplastic anemia, particularly inyoung men who recovered from an episode of liver inﬂammation 1–2 months prior. Par-vovirus B19 infection most commonly causes pure red cell aplasia, particularly in patientswith chronic hemolytic states and high RBC turnover (e.g., sickle cell anemia).
III-101. The answer D.   (Chap. 102)   This patient has aplastic anemia. In the absence of drugs or
toxins that cause bone marrow suppression, it is most likely that he has immune-mediatedinjury. Growth factors are not effective in the setting of a hypoplastic marrow. Transfusionshould be avoided unless emergently needed to prevent the development of alloantibodies.Glucocorticoids have no efﬁcacy in aplastic anemia. Immunosuppression with antithy-mocyte globulin and cyclosporine is a therapy with proven efﬁcacy for this autoimmunedisease with a response rate of up to 70%. Relapses are common and myelodysplastic syn-drome or leukemia may occur in approximately 15% of treated patients. Immunosuppres-sion is the treatment of choice for patients without suitable bone marrow transplantdonors. Bone marrow transplantation is the best current therapy for young patients withmatched sibling donors. Allogeneic bone marrow transplants from matched siblings resultin long term survival in >80% of patients, with better results in children than adults.
III-102. The answer is E.   (Chap. 102)   The combination of intravascular hemolysis (hemoglobi-
nuria) and thrombosis in an unusual location (particularly in proximity to the abdominalviscera) should prompt a search for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). PNHresults from an acquired mutation in stem cells resulting in the loss of a glycosylphosphati-dylinositol-linked cell surface membrane proteins in a clone of granulocytes. Diagnosis ismade by ﬂow cytometry of CD55 or CD59 expression on these granulocytes. The Ham orsucrose lysis tests are no longer routinely performed. Clones of deﬁcient cells are often de-tected in patients with aplastic anemia. Adenocarcinomas are strongly associated withthrombosis (Trousseau’s syndrome) and may cause ascites, but hemolysis without mi-croangiopathic hemolytic anemia makes this less likely. Other causes of a hypercoagulablestate such as those listed should be examined if an evaluation for PNH is negative.
100 III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
III-103. The answer is B.   (Chap. 205)   The differential diagnosis for a patient presenting with
visceral leishmaniasis is broad and includes diseases that cause fever or organomegaly.
Characteristic ﬁndings include a history of exposure to sandﬂies at night or darkening ofthe skin on physical examination. The skin discoloration is usually only seen in end-stagecachectic patients. Miliary tuberculosis is on the differential but would be unlikely with anormal chest radiograph. Cirrhosis of the liver may present this way although the persis-tent fevers would be uncharacteristic. The visceral form of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) maypresent with a similar physical examination and can be seen in the HIV-negative patientwho is otherwise malnourished or immunosuppressed. KS would be less likely than vis-ceral leishmaniasis given the exposure history and the characteristic end-stage ﬁnding ofskin discoloration. Sickle cell anemia causes autosplenectomy, not splenomegaly.
III-104. The answer is B.   (Chap. 110)   This patient has a coagulation disorder characterized by
recurrent bleeding episodes into closed spaces with an inheritance pattern suggestive of arecessive or X-linked pattern. An isolated prolonged prothrombin time suggests FactorVII deﬁciency, which is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The thrombin timewill also be normal in these cases. While hemophilia A (factor VIII deﬁciency) and hemo-philia B (factor IX deﬁciency) are the most common inherited factor deﬁciencies, thesedisorders do not cause an isolated prolonged prothrombin time. They will cause a pro-longation of the aPTT with a normal PT. Both hemophilias are inherited in an X-linkedpattern. Prothrombin deﬁciency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that will causeprolongation of the aPTT, PT, and thrombin time. Ingestion of warfarin may also causethis clinical scenario but is less likely given the inheritance pattern.
III-105. The answer is C.   (Chap. 110)   An elevated aPTT with a normal PT is consistent with a
functional deﬁciency of Factor VIII, IX, XI, XII, high molecular weight kininogen, orprekallikrein. Congenital or nutritional deﬁciencies of these factors will be corrected inthe laboratory by the addition of serum from a normal subject. The presence of a spe-ciﬁc antibody to a coagulation factor is termed an acquired inhibitor. Usually these aredirected against Factor VIII, although acquired inhibitors to prothrombin, Factor V ,Factor IX, Factor X, and Factor XI are described. Patients with acquired inhibitors aretypically older adults (median age 60) with pregnancy or post-partum states being lesscommon. No underlying disease is found in 50%. The most common underlying dis-eases are autoimmune diseases, malignancies (lymphoma, prostate cancer), and derma-tologic diseases. Acquired factor VIII or IX inhibitors present clinically in the samefashion as congenital hemophilias. Developing the coagulation disorder later in life ismore suggestive of an acquired inhibitor if there is no antecedent history of coagulopa-thy. Syphilis infection is a cause of a falsely abnormal aPTT but since this is a laboratoryphenomenon, there is no associated clinical coagulopathy. Vitamin C deﬁciency maycause gingival bleeding and a perifollicular petechial rash but does not cause signiﬁcanthemarthroses or a prolonged aPTT. A tobacco history and laboratory evidence ofchronic illness (anemia, hypoalbuminemia) in this scenario raise the suspicion of anunderlying malignancy.
III-106. The answer is A, although B possible.   (Chap. 110)   Hemophilia A (absent Factor VIII)
and hemophilia B (absent Factor IX) are indistinguishable clinically. Hemophilia A ac-counts for 80% of the cases of hemophilia. It has a prevalence in the general populationof 1:5000 in contrast to Hemophilia B that has a prevalence of 1:30,000. The disease phe-notype correlates with the amount of residual Factor activity and can be classiﬁed as se-vere (<1% activity), moderate (1–5% activity) or mild (6–30% activity). The patient inthis scenario is likely to have a mild form of the disease. Hemophiliacs have a normalbleeding time, platelet count, thrombin time and prothrombin time. The diagnosis ismade by measuring residual factor activity. The prolonged aPTT in hemophilia will becorrected by mixing with normal plasma (that will contain the deﬁcient Factors VIII andIX). Patients with acquired inhibitors will not correct the prolonged aPTT with normalplasma because the defect is antibody mediated.
III. O NCOLOGY AND  HEMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 101
III-107. The answer is D.   (Chap. 110)   This patient presents with a signiﬁcant upper GI bleed
with a prolonged prothrombin time. Hemophilia should not cause a prolonged pro-
thrombin time. This and the presence of ascites raise the possibility of liver disease andcirrhosis. The contamination of blood products in the 1970s and 1980s resulted in wide-spread transmission of HIV and Hepatitis C within the hemophilia population receivingfactor infusions. It is estimated in 2006 that >80% of hemophilia patients >20 years oldare infected with hepatitis C virus. Viral inactivation steps were introduced in the 1980sand recombinant Factor VIII and IX were ﬁrst produced in the 1990s. Hepatitis C is themajor cause of morbidity and the second leading cause of death in patients exposed toolder factor concentrates. Patients develop cirrhosis and the complications including as-cites and variceal bleeding. End-stage liver disease requiring a liver transplant will be cur-ative for the cirrhosis and the hemophilia (the liver produces Factor VIII). Hepatitis Bwas not transmitted in signiﬁcant numbers to patients with hemophilia. Diverticular dis-ease or peptic ulcer disease would not explain the prolonged prothrombin time. Patientswith inadequately repleted Factor VIII levels are more likely to develop hemarthrosesthan GI bleeds and the slightly prolonged aPTT makes this unlikely.
III-108. The answer is E.   (Chap. 110)   The differentiation between DIC and severe liver disease
is challenging. Both entities may manifest with similar laboratory ﬁndings: elevated ﬁ-brinogen degradation products, prolonged aPTT and PT, anemia, and thrombocytope-nia. When suspecting DIC, these tests should be repeated over a period of 6–8 hoursbecause abnormalities may change dramatically in patients with severe DIC. In contrast,these tests should not ﬂuctuate as much in patients with severe liver disease. Bacterialsepsis with positive blood cultures is a common cause of DIC but is not diagnostic.
III-109. The answer is E.   (Chap. 103)   In a patient presenting with an elevated hemoglobin and
hematocrit, the initial step in the evaluation is to determine whether erythrocytosis rep-resents a true elevation in red cell mass or whether spurious erythrocytosis is present dueto plasma volume contraction. This step may be not necessary however in those individ-uals with hemoglobin greater than 20 g/dL. Once absolute erythrocytosis has been deter-mined by measurement of red cell mass and plasma volume, the cause of erythrocytosismust be determined. If there is not an obvious cause of the erythrocytosis, an erythropoi-etin level should be checked. An elevated erythropoietin level suggests hypoxia or auton-omous production of erythropoietin as the cause of erythrocytosis. However, a normalerythropoietin level does not exclude hypoxia as a cause. A low erythropoietin levelshould be seen in the myeloproliferative disorder polycythemia vera (PV), the most likelycause of erythrocytosis in this patient. PV is often discovered incidentally when elevatedhemoglobin is found during testing for other reasons. When symptoms are present, themost common complaints are related to hyperviscosity of the blood and include vertigo,headache, tinnitus, and transient ischemic attacks. Patients may also complain of pruri-tus after showering. Erythromelalgia is the term give to the symptoms complex of burn-ing, pain and erythema in the extremities and is associated with thrombocytosis in PV .Isolated systolic hypertension and splenomegaly may be found. In addition to elevatedred blood cell mass and low erythropoietin levels, other laboratory ﬁndings in PV includethrombocytosis and leukocytosis with abnormal leukocytes present. Uric acid levels andleukocyte alkaline phosphatase may be elevated, but are not diagnostic for PV . Approxi-mately 30% of individuals with PV are homozygous for the JAK2 V617F mutation, andover 90% are heterozygous for this mutation. This mutation located on the short arm ofchromosome 9 causes constitutive activation of the JAK protein, a tyrosine kinase thatrenders erythrocytes resistant to apoptosis and allows them to continue production inde-pendently from erythropoietin. However, not every patient with PV expresses this muta-tion. Thus, it is not recommended as a diagnostic test for PV at this time. Bone marrowbiopsy provides no speciﬁc information in PV and is not recommended.
This page intentionally left blank 
103IV . INFECTIOUS DISEASES
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question
IV-1.   Which type of bite represents a potential medical
emergency in an asplenic patient?
A. Cat bite
B. Dog biteC. Fish biteD. Human bite
IV-2.   A 24-year-old man with advanced HIV infection pre-
sents to the emergency department with a tan painlessnodule on the lower extremity (Figure IV-2, Color Atlas).He is afebrile and has no other lesions. He does not takeantiretroviral therapy, and his last CD4+ T cell count was20/µL. He lives with a friend who has cats and kittens. Abiopsy shows lobular proliferation of blood vessels linedby enlarged endothelial cells and a mixed acute andchronic inﬂammatory inﬁltrate. Tissue stains show gram-negative bacilli. Which of the following is most likely tobe effective therapy for the lesion?
A. Azithromycin
B. CephazolinC. Interferon α
D. PenicillinE. Vancomycin
IV-3.   A 38-year-old homeless man presents to the emer-
gency room with a transient ischemic attack characterizedby a facial droop and left arm weakness lasting 20 min, andleft upper quadrant pain. He reports intermittent subjec-tive fevers, diaphoresis, and chills for the past 2 weeks. Hehas had no recent travel or contact with animals. He hastaken no recent antibiotics. Physical examination reveals aslightly distressed man with disheveled appearance. Histemperature is 38.2°C; heart rate is 90 beats per minute;blood pressure is 127/74 mmHg. He has poor dentition.Cardiac examination reveals an early diastolic murmurover the left 3d intercostal space. His spleen is tender and 2cm descended below the costal margin. He has tenderpainful red nodules on the tips of the third ﬁnger of hisright hand and on the fourth ﬁnger of his left hand that arenew. He has nits evident on his clothes, consistent withbody louse infection. White blood cell count is 14,500,with 5% band forms and 93% polymorphonuclear cells.Blood cultures are drawn followed by empirical vancomy-cin therapy. These cultures remain negative for growth 5days later. He remains febrile but hemodynamically stablebut does develop a new lesion on his toe similar to thoseon his ﬁngers on hospital day 3. A transthoracic echocar-diogram reveals a 1-cm mobile vegetation on the cusp ofhis aortic valve and moderate aortic regurgitation. A CTscan of the abdomen shows an enlarged spleen withwedge-shaped splenic and renal infarctions. What testshould be sent to conﬁrm the most likely diagnosis?
A. Bartonella  serology
B. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) heterophile antibody
C. HIV polymerase chain reaction (PCR)D. Peripheral blood smearE. Q fever serology
IV-4.   A 36-year-old man with HIV/AIDS (CD4+ lympho-
cyte count = 112/ µL) develops a scaly, waxy, yellowish,
patchy, crusty, pruritic rash on and around his nose. The
rest of his skin examination is normal. Which of the fol-lowing is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Molluscum contagiosum
B. PsoriasisC. Reactivation herpes zosterD. Seborrheic dermatitis
IV-5.   A 28-year-old woman returns from a 6-week trip to
Tanzania in March. She calls your ofﬁce 2 weeks latercomplaining of new symptoms of fever, mild abdominalpain, and headache. She feels like she has the ﬂu. What
should you do next?
A. Ask her to come to the clinic in the next 24 h.
B. Emergently refer her to the emergency department.C. Write her a prescription for oseltamivir and call her
in 24 h to ensure improvement.
D. Write her a prescription for a respiratory ﬂuoro-
quinolone.IV-3. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
104 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-6.   A 26-year-old woman comes to your clinic complain-
ing of 3–4 weeks of a malodorous white vaginal dis-
charge. She recently began having unprotected sexualintercourse with a new male partner. He is asymptomatic.
Her only medication is oral contraceptives. Examinationreveals a thin white discharge that evenly coats the vagina.Further examination of the discharge reveals that it has apH of 5.0 and has a “ﬁshy” odor when 10% KOH is addedto the discharge. Microscopic examination reveals vaginalcells coated with coccobacillary organisms. Which of thefollowing therapies is indicated?
A. Acyclovir, 400 mg PO tid × 7 days
B. Metronidazole, 2 g PO × 1
C. Metronidazole, 500 mg PO bid × 7 days
D. Fluconazole, 100 mg PO × 1
E. Vaginal douching
IV-7.   A 51-year-old woman is diagnosed with Plasmodium
falciparum  malaria after returning from a safari in Tanza-
nia. Her parasitemia is 6%, hematocrit is 21%, bilirubin is
7.8 mg/dL, and creatinine is 2.7 mg/dL. She is still making60 mL of urine per hour. She rapidly becomes obtunded.Intensive care is initiated, with frequent creatinine checks,close monitoring for hypoglycemia, infusion of phe-nobarbital for seizure prevention, mechanical ventilationfor airway protection, and exchange transfusion to ad-dress her high parasitemia. Which of the following regi-mens is recommended as ﬁrst-line treatment for hermalarial infection?
A. Chloroquine
B. Intravenous artesunateC. Intravenous quinineD. Intravenous quinidineE. Meﬂoquine
IV-8.   All of the following infections associated with sexual
activity correlate with increased acquisition of HIV infec-tion in women except
A. bacterial vaginosisB. Chlamydia
C. gonorrheaD. herpes simplex virus-2E. Trichomonas vaginalis
F. all of the above are associated with increased acqui-
sition
IV-9.   A 9-year-old boy is brought to a pediatric emergency
room by his father. He has had 2 days of headache, neckstiffness, and photophobia and this morning had a tem-perature of 38.9°C (102°F). He has also had several epi-sodes of vomiting and diarrhea overnight. A lumbarpuncture is performed, which reveals pleocytosis in thecerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Which of the following is trueregarding enteroviruses as a cause of aseptic meningitis?
A. An elevated CSF protein rules out enteroviruses as a
cause of meningitis.B. Enteroviruses are responsible for up to 90% of asep-
tic meningitis in children.
C. Lymphocytes will predominate in the CSF early on,
with a shift to neutrophils at 24 h.
D. Symptoms are more severe in children than in adults.
E. They occur more commonly in the winter and spring.
IV-10.   A 56-year-old man with a history of hypertension
and cigarette smoking is admitted to the intensive careunit after 1 week of fever and nonproductive cough. Im-
aging shows a new pulmonary inﬁltrate, and urine anti-gen test for Legionella  is positive. Each of the following is
likely to be an effective antibiotic except
A. azithromycinB. aztreonamC. levoﬂoxacinD. tigecyclineE. trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
IV-11.   Which of the following statements regarding HIV
epidemiology in the United States is true as of 2005?
A. HIV incidence is currently decreasing among men
who sleep with men.
B. Heterosexual contact accounts for the majority of
current HIV cases.
C. Minority women aged 13–19 from the southeastern
United States account for a growing proportion of
prevalent HIV cases.
D. The proportion of cases due to high-risk heterosex-
ual contact has decreased dramatically over the past20 years.
E. The proportion of prevalent HIV cases due to injec-
tion drug use is currently increasing.
IV-12.   A 48-year-old female presents to her physician with
a 2-day history of fever, arthralgias, diarrhea, and head-ache. She recently returned from an ecotour in tropicalsub-Saharan Africa, where she went swimming in inlandrivers. Notable ﬁndings on physical examination includea temperature of 38.7°C (101.7°F); 2-cm tender mobilelymph nodes in the axilla, cervical, and femoral regions;and a palpable spleen. Her white blood cell count is15,000/µL with 50% eosinophils. She should receivetreatments with which of the following medications?
A. Chloroquine
B. MebendazoleC. MetronidazoleD. PraziquantelE. Thiabendazole
IV-13.   A 39-year-old woman received a liver transplant 2
years ago and is maintained on prednisone, 5 mg, and cy-closporine A, 8 mg/kg per day. She has had two episodes
of rejection since transplant, as well an episode of cyto-megalovirus syndrome and Nocardia  pneumonia. She in-IV-9. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 105
tends on taking a 2-week gorilla-watching trip to Rwanda
and seeks your advice regarding her health while abroad.Which of the following potential interventions is strictlycontraindicated?
A. Malaria prophylaxis
B. Meningococcal vaccineC. Rabies vaccineD. Typhoid puriﬁed polysaccharid vaccineE. Y ellow fever vaccine
IV-14.   A 17-year-old woman presents to the clinic com-
plaining of vaginal itchiness and malodorous discharge.She is sexually active with multiple partners, and she is in-terested in getting tested for sexually transmitted diseases.A wet-mount microscopic examination is performed, andtrichomonal parasites are identiﬁed. Which of the follow-ing statements regarding trichomoniasis is true?
A. A majority of women are asymptomatic.
B. No treatment is necessary as disease is self-limited.C. The patient’s sexual partner need not be treated.D. Trichomoniasis can only be spread sexually.E. Trichomoniasis is 100% sensitive to metronidazole.
IV-15.   The most common clinical presentation of infection
with Babesia microti  is
A. acute hepatitisB. chronic meningitisC. generalized lymphadenopathyD. overwhelming hemolysis, high-output congestive
heart failure, respiratory failure, and disseminatedintravascular coagulation
E. self-limited ﬂulike illness
IV-16.   When given as a ﬁrst-line agent for invasive As-
pergillus  infection, voriconazole commonly causes all of
the following side effects except
A. drug-drug interactionsB. hepatotoxicityC. photosensitivity skin rashesD. renal toxicityE. visual disturbances
IV-17.   A 42-year-old man with AIDS and a CD4+ lympho-
cyte count of 23 presents with shortness of breath and fa-tigue in the absence of fevers. On examination, heappears chronically ill with pale conjunctiva. Hematocritis 16%. Mean corpuscular volume is 84. Red cell distribu-tion width is normal. Bilirubin, lactose dehydrogenase,and haptoglobin are all within normal limits. Reticulo-cyte count is zero. White blood cell count is 4300, with anabsolute neutrophil count of 2500. Platelet count is105,000. Which of the following tests is most likely toproduce a diagnosis?
A. Bone marrow aspirate and biopsyB. Iron studies
C. Parvovirus B19 IgGD. Parvovirus B19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR)E. Parvovirus B19 IgMF. Peripheral blood smear
IV-18.   All of the following are risk factors for the develop-
ment of Legionella pneumonia except
A. glucocorticoid useB. HIV infectionC. neutropeniaD. recent surgeryE. tobacco use
IV-19.    A 38-year-old female pigeon keeper who has no sig-
niﬁcant past medical history, is taking no medications, hasno allergies, and is HIV-negative presents to the emergencyroom with a fever, headache, and mild nuchal rigidity.Neurologic examination is normal. Head CT examinationis normal. Lumbar puncture is signiﬁcant for an openingpressure of 20 cmH
2O, white blood cell count of 15 cells/
µL (90% monocytes), protein of 0.5 g/L (50 mg/mL), glu-
cose of 2.8 mmol/L (50 mg/dL), and positive India inkstain. What is the appropriate therapy for this patient?
A. Amphotericin B for 2 weeks
B. Amphotericin B with ﬂucytosine for 2 weeksC. Amphotericin B for 2 weeks followed by oral ﬂucon-
azole, 400 mg daily
D. Amphotericin B for 10 weeks followed by oral ﬂu-
conazole, 400 mg daily for 6–12 months
E. Ceftriaxone and vancomycin for 2 weeks
IV-20.   A 30-year-old female with end-stage renal disease
who receives her dialysis through a tunneled catheter inher shoulder presents with fever and severe low back pain.On examination, she is uncomfortable and diaphoreticbut hemodynamically stable. She has a soft 2/6 early sys-tolic ﬂow murmur. Her line site is red and warm with nopustular exudates. She is very tender over her lower back.Neurologically, she is completely intact. There is no evi-dence of Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, or Roth spots. Herwhite count is 16,700 with 12% bands. Immediate evalua-tion should include all of the following except
A. MRI of the lumbar spineB. removal of her dialysis catheterC. transthoracic echocardiogramD. two sets of blood cultures followed by vancomycin
as well as gram-negative coverage
IV-21.   While attending the University of Georgia, a group
of friends go on a 5-day canoeing and camping trip in ru-ral southern Georgia. A few weeks later, one of the camp-ers develops a serpiginous, raised, pruritic, erythematouseruption on the buttocks. Strongyloides larvae are foundin his stool. Three of his companions, who are asympto-IV-16. (Continued) IV-13. (Continued)
106 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
matic, are also found to have strongyloides larvae in their
stool. Which of the following is indicated in the asympto-matic carriers?
A. Fluconazole
B. IvermectinC. MebendazoleD. MeﬂoquineE. Treatment only for symptomatic illness
IV-22.   A 79-year-old man has had a diabetic foot ulcer
overlying his third metatarsal head for 3 months but hasnot been compliant with his physician’s request to off-load the affected foot. He presents with dull, throbbingfoot pain and subjective fevers. Examination reveals aputrid-smelling wound notable also for a pus-ﬁlled 2.5cm wide ulcer. A metal probe is used to probe thewound and it detects bone as well as a 3-cm deep cavity.Gram stain of the pus shows gram-positive cocci inchains, gram-positive rods, gram-negative diplococci,enteric-appearing gram-negative rods, tiny pleomor-phic gram-negative rods, and a predominance of neu-trophils. Which of the following empirical antibioticregimens is recommended while blood and drainagecultures are processed?
A. Ampicillin/sulbactam, 1.5 g IV q4h
B. Clindamycin, 600 mg PO tidC. Linezolid, 600 mg IV bidD. Metronidazole, 500 mg PO qidE. Vancomycin, 1g IV bid
IV-23.   Which of the following scenarios is most likely asso-
ciated with the lowest risk of HIV transmission to ahealth care provider after an accidental needle stick froma patient with HIV?
A. The needle is visibly contaminated with the patient’s
blood.
B. The needle stick injury is a deep tissue injury to the
health care provider.
C. The patient whose blood is on the contaminated
needle has been on antiretroviral therapy for many
years with a history of resistance to many availableagents but most recently has had successful viralsuppression on current therapy.
D. The patient whose blood is on the contaminated
needle was diagnosed with acute HIV infection 2weeks ago.
IV-24.   All of the following regarding herpes simplex virus
(HSV)-2 infection are true except
A. Approximately one in ﬁve Americans harbors HSV-
2 antibodies.
B. Asymptomatic shedding of HSV-2 in the genital
tract occurs nearly as frequently in those with no
symptoms as in those with ulcerative disease.C. Asymptomatic shedding of HSV-2 is associated with
transmission of virus.
D. HSV-2 seropositivity is an independent risk factor
for HIV transmission.
E. Seroprevalence rates of HSV-2 are lower in Africa
than in the United States.
IV-25.   What is the most common manifestation of Coccid-
ioides  infection in an immunocompetent host?
A. Acute pneumoniaB. Asymptomatic seroconversionC. Hypersensitivity phenomena such as erythema no-
dosum
D. MeningitisE. Self limited ﬂulike illness
IV-26.   Y ou are a physician working on a cruise ship travel-
ing from Miami to the Yucatán Peninsula. In the course of24 h, 32 people are seen with acute gastrointestinal illnessthat is marked by vomiting and watery diarrhea. Themost likely causative agent of the illness is
A. enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
B. norovirus
C. rotavirusD. Shigella
E. Salmonella
IV-27.   What is the best method for diagnosis?
A. Acute and convalescent antibody titersB. Demonstration of Norwalk toxin in the stoolC. Electron microscopyD. Isolation in cell cultureE. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to identify the
Norwalk-associated calcivirus
IV-28.   A 32-year-old man presents with jaundice and mal-
aise. He is found to have acute hepatitis B with positive
hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA and E antigen. Which ofthe following antiviral agents are approved as part of atherapeutic regimen for mono-infection with hepatitis B?
A. Efavirenz
B. GanciclovirC. LamivudineD. RimantadineE. T enofovir
IV-29.   Which of the following factors is the most impor-
tant determinant of the rate of disease progression frominitial HIV infection to clinical diagnosis of AIDS?
A. Age
B. CD4+ lymphocyte count 6 months after infectionC. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG statusD. HIV resistance panel at infectionE. HIV viral load set point 6 months after initial infectionIV-24. (Continued) IV-21. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 107
IV-30.   The standard starting regimen for acid-fast bacilli
smear–positive active pulmonary tuberculosis is
A. isoniazid
B. isoniazid, rifampinC. isoniazid, moxiﬂoxacin, pyrazinamide, ethambutolD. isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, ethambutolE. rifampin, moxiﬂoxacin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol
IV-31.   All of the following are common manifestations of
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection following lung trans-plantation except
A. bronchiolitis obliteransB. CMV esophagitisC. CMV pneumoniaD. CMV retinitisE. CMV syndrome (fever, malaise, cytopenias, trans-
aminitis, and CMV viremia)
IV-32.   Which of the following statements regarding severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is true?
A. SARS displays poor human-to-human transmission.
B. SARS is more severe among children than adults.C. The etiologic agent of SARS is in the Adenovirus
family.
D. There have been no reported cases of SARS since
2004.
E. There is no known environmental reservoir for the
virus causing SARS.
IV-33.   A 72-year-old woman is admitted to the intensive
care unit with respiratory failure. She has fever, obtunda-tion, and bilateral parenchymal consolidation on chestimaging. Which of the following is true regarding the di-agnosis of Legionella  pneumonia?
A. Acute and convalescent antibodies are not helpful
due to the presence of multiple serotypes.
B. Legionella  can never be seen on a Gram stain.
C. Legionella  cultures grow rapidly on the proper media.
D. Legionella  urinary antigen maintains utility after an-
tibiotic use.
E. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Legionella
DNA is the “gold standard” diagnostic test.
IV-34.   Which of the following has resulted in a signiﬁcant
decrease in the incidence of trichinellosis in the UnitedStates?
A. Adequate therapy that allows for eradication of in-
fection in index cases before person-to-person
spread can occur
B. Earlier diagnosis due to a new culture assayC. Federal laws limiting the import of foreign cattleD. Laws prohibiting the feeding of uncooked garbage
to pigs
E. Requirements for hand-washing by commercial
kitchen staff who handle raw meatIV-35.   A 23-year-old woman is newly diagnosed with geni-
tal herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 infection. What can youtell her that the chance of reactivation disease will be dur-ing the ﬁrst year after infection?
A. 5%
B. 25%C. 50%D. 75%E. 90%
IV-36.    The most common cause of traveler’s diarrhea in
Mexico is
A. Campylobacter jejuni
B. Entamoeba histolytica
C. enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
D. Giardia lamblia
E. Vibrio cholerae
IV-37.   A patient comes to clinic and describes progressive
muscle weakness over several weeks. He has also experi-
enced nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. One month ago hehad been completely healthy and describes a bear huntingtrip in Alaska, where they ate some of the game theykilled. Soon after he returned, his gastrointestinal (GI)symptoms began, followed by muscle weakness in his jawand neck that has now spread to his arms and lower back.Examination conﬁrms decreased muscle strength in theupper extremities and neck. He also has slowed extraocu-lar movements. Laboratory examination shows panicvalues for elevated eosinophils and serum creatine phos-phokinase. Which of the following organisms is mostlikely the cause of his symptoms?
A. Campylobacter
B. Cytomegalovirus
C. Giardia
D. Taenia solium
E. Trichinella
IV-38.   Abacavir is a nucleoside transcription inhibitor that car-
ries which side effect unique for HIV antiretroviral agents?
A. Fanconi’s anemia
B. GranulocytopeniaC. Lactic acidosisD. LipoatrophyE. Severe hypersensitivity reaction
IV-39.   A 30-year-old healthy woman presents to the hospital
with severe dyspnea, confusion, productive cough, and fe-vers. She had been ill 1 week prior with a ﬂulike illnesscharacterized by fever, myalgias, headache, and malaise.Her illness almost entirely improved without medical in-tervention until 36 h ago, when she developed new rigorsfollowed by progression of the respiratory symptoms. Oninitial examination, her temperature is 39.6°C, pulse is 130beats per minute, blood pressure is 95/60 mmHg, respira-tory rate is 40, and oxygen saturation is 88% on 100% face
108 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
mask. On examination she is clammy, confused, and very
dyspneic. Lung examination reveals amphoric breathsounds over her left lower lung ﬁelds. She is intubated andresuscitated with ﬂuid and antibiotics. Chest CT scan re-veals necrosis of her left lower lobe. Blood and sputum cul-tures grow Staphylococcus aureus. This isolate is likely to be
resistant to which of the following antibiotics?
A. Doxycycline
B. LinezolidC. MethicillinD. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)E. Vancomycin
IV-40. Helicobacter pylori  colonization is implicated in all
of the following conditions except
A. duodenal ulcer diseaseB. gastric adenocarcinomaC. gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphoma
D. gastroesophageal reﬂux diseaseE. peptic ulcer disease
IV-41.   A 24-year-old woman presents with diffuse arthral-
gias and morning stiffness in her hands, knees, andwrists. Two weeks earlier she had a self-limited febrile ill-ness notable for a red facial rash and lacy reticular rash onher extremities. On examination, her bilateral wrists,metacarpophalangeal joints, and proximal interpha-langeal joints are warm and slightly boggy. What test ismost likely to reveal her diagnosis?
A. Antinuclear antibody
B. Chlamydia trachomatis  ligase chain reaction of the urine
C. Joint aspiration for crystals and cultureD. Parvovirus B19 IgME. Rheumatoid factor
IV-42. Candida albicans  is isolated from the following pa-
tients. Rate the likelihood in order from greatest to least
that the positive culture represents true infection ratherthan contaminant or noninfectious colonization?
Patient X : A 63-year-old man admitted to the intensive
care unit (ICU) with pneumonia who has recurrent fe-
vers after receiving 5 days of levoﬂoxacin for pneumo-nia. A urinalysis drawn from a Foley catheter showspositive leukocyte esterase, negative nitrite, 15 whiteblood cells/hpf, 10 red blood cells/hpf, and 10 epithelialcells/hpf. Urine culture grows Candida albicans .
Patient Y : A 38-year-old female on hemodialysis presents
with low-grade fevers and malaise. Peripheral bloodcultures grow Candida albicans in one out of a total of
three sets of blood cultures in the aerobic bottle only.
Patient Z : A 68-year-old man presents with a 2-day his-
tory of fever, productive cough, and malaise. Chestroentgenogram reveals a left lower lobe inﬁltrate. Asputum Gram stain shows many PMNs, few epithelialcells, moderate gram-positive cocci in chains, and yeastconsistent with Candida .
A. Patient X > patient Z > patient YB. Patient Y > patient Z > patient XC. Patient Y > patient X > patient ZD. Patient X > patient Y > patient ZE. Patient Z > patient X > patient Y
IV-43.   Which of the following statements regarding Clos-
tridium difﬁcile –associated disease relapses is true?
A. A ﬁrst recurrence does not imply greater risk of fur-
ther recurrences.
B. Most recurrences are due to antibiotic resistance.C. Recurrent C. difﬁcile –associated disease has been as-
sociated with a higher risk of colon cancer.
D. Recurrent disease is associated with serious compli-
cations.
E. T esting for clearance of C. difﬁcile  is warranted after
treating recurrences.
IV-44.   A 38-year-old man with HIV/AIDS presents with 4
weeks of diarrhea, fever, and weight loss.Which of the fol-lowing tests makes the diagnosis of cytomegalovirus(CMV) colitis?
A. CMV IgG
B. Colonoscopy with biopsyC. Serum CMV polymerase chain reaction (PCR)D. Stool CMV antigenE. Stool CMV culture
IV-45.   In the inpatient setting, extended-spectrum β-lacta-
mase (ESBL)-producing gram-negative infections aremost likely to occur after frequent use of which of the fol-lowing classes of antibiotics?
A. Carbapenems
B. MacrolidesC. QuinolonesD. Third-generation cephalosporins
IV-46.   A 46-year-old veterinary researcher who frequently op-
erates on rats presents to the emergency room with jaundiceand scant hemoptysis. She recalls having a fairly deep cut on
her hand during an operation about 14 days prior. She has
had no recent travel or other animal exposures. Her illnessstarted ~9 days prior with fever, chills, severe headache, in-tense myalgias, and nausea. She also noted bilateral conjunc-tival injection. Thinking that she had inﬂuenza infection, shestayed home from work and started to feel better 5 days intothe illness. However, within a day her symptoms had re-turned with worsening headache, and soon thereafter shedeveloped jaundice. On initial evaluation, her temperature is38.6°C, pulse is 105 beats per minute, and blood pressure is156/89 mmHg with O
2 saturations of 92% on room air. She
appears acutely ill and is both icteric and profoundly jaun-diced. Her liver is enlarged and tender, but there are no pal-IV-42. (Continued) IV-39. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 109
pable masses and she has no splenomegaly. Laboratory
results are notable for a BUN of 64, creatinine of 3.6, total
bilirubin of 64.8 (direct 59.2), AST = 84, ALT = 103, alkalinephosphatase = 384, white blood cell (WBC) count is 11,000with 13% bands and 80% polymorphonuclear forms, he-matocrit of 33%, and platelets = 142. Urinalysis reveals 20WBCs/hpf, 3+ protein, and granular casts. Coagulationstudies are within normal limits. Lumbar puncture reveals asterile pleocytosis. CT scan of the chest shows diffuse ﬂame-like inﬁltrates consistent with pulmonary hemorrhage.What is the likely diagnosis?
A. Acute interstitial pneumonitis
B. Acute myeloid leukemiaC. Polyarteritis nodosumD. Rat bite fever ( Streptobacillus moniliformis  infection)
E. Weil’s syndrome ( Leptospira interrogans  infection)
IV-47.   A 17-year-old boy in Arkansas presents to a clinic in
August with fever, headache, myalgias, nausea, and an-orexia 8 days after returning from a 1-week camping trip.Physical examination is remarkable for a temperature of38.6°C and a generally fatigued but nontoxic appearing,well-developed young man. He does not have a rash, andorthostatic vital sign measurements are negative. Whatwould be a reasonable course of action?
A. Initiate ceftriaxone, 1g IM × 1
B. Initiate doxycycline, 100 mg PO bid
C. Initiate oseltamivir, 75 mg PO qdD. Reassure the patient and order a heterophile anti-
body titer (Monospot)
E. Reassure the patient and order rickettsial serologies
IV-48.   A 26-year-old woman presents to the emergency de-
partment with fever, chills, backache, and malaise. She re-ports a habit of active IV drug use; last use was 2 days ago.Her vital signs show a temperature of 38.4°C, heart rate of106/minute, respiratory rate of 22/minute, blood pres-sure of 114/61 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 98% on2 L per nasal cannula. A chest x-ray and subsequent chestCT scan demonstrate multiple peripheral nodular inﬁl-trates with cavitation. Blood cultures are sent to the labo-ratory and are pending. At this point in the workup, how
many minor criteria are met from the Duke criteria forthe clinical diagnosis of infective endocarditis?
A. 0
B. 1C. 2D. 3E. 5
IV-49.   Which of the following is true regarding inﬂuenza
prophylaxis?
A. Patients receiving an intramuscular inﬂuenza vac-
cine should be warned of the increased risk of Guil-
lain-Barré syndrome.B. Patients with hypersensitivity to eggs should not re-
ceive the intramuscular vaccine.
C. The intramuscular inﬂuenza vaccine is a live, attenu-
ated strain of inﬂuenza that is based on isolates fromthe previous year’s strains of inﬂuenza A and B.
D. The intramuscular inﬂuenza vaccine should not be
given to immunocompromised hosts.
E. The intranasal spray, “Flu-mist,” is an inactivated vi-
rus preparation based on the previous year’s strainsof inﬂuenza A and B.
IV-50.   Which of the following is the most common mani-
festation of initial (primary) herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 infection?
A. Asymptomatic infection
B. Genital ulcersC. Gingivostomatitis and pharyngitisD. Orolabial ulcersE. Trigeminal neuralgia
IV-51.   A patient presents to the clinic complaining of nau-
sea, vomiting, crampy abdominal pain, and markedly in-creased ﬂatus. The patient has not experienced anydiarrhea or vomiting but notes that he has been belchingmore than usual and he describes a “sulfur-like” odorwhen he does so. He returned from a 3-week trip to Peruand Ecuador several days ago and notes that his symp-toms began about a week ago. Giardiasis is considered inthe differential. Which of the following is true regardingGiardia ?
A. Boiling water prior to ingestion will not kill Giardia
cysts.
B. Giardia  is a disease of developing nations; if this pa-
tient had not travelled, there would be no likelihoodof giardiasis.
C. Hematogenous dissemination and eosinophilia are
common.
D. Ingestion of as few as 10 cysts can cause human disease.E. Lack of diarrhea makes the diagnosis of Giardia  very
unlikely.
IV-52.   An 18-year-old man presents with a ﬁrm, non-
tender lesion around his anal oriﬁce. The lesion is about1.5 cm in diameter and has a cartilaginous feel on clini-cal examination. The patient reports that it has pro-gressed to this stage from a small papule. It is not tender.
He reports recent unprotected anal intercourse. Bacterialculture of the lesion is negative. A rapid plasmin reagin(RPR) test is also negative. Therapeutic interventions
should include
A. IM ceftriaxone, 1g
B. IM penicillin G benzathine, 2.4 million UC. oral acyclovir, 200 mg 5 times per dayD. observationE. surgical resection with biopsyIV-49. (Continued) IV-46. (Continued)
110 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-53.   A 17-year-old woman with a medical history of mild in-
termittent asthma presents to your clinic in February with
several days of cough, fever, malaise, and myalgias. She notesthat her symptoms started 3 days earlier with a headache andfatigue, and that several students and teachers at her highschool have been diagnosed recently with “the ﬂu.” She didnot receive a ﬂu shot this year. Which of the following medi-cation treatment plans is the best option for this patient?
A. Aspirin and a cough suppressant with codeine
B. Oseltamivir, 75 mg PO bid for 5 daysC. Rimantadine, 100 mg PO bid for 1 weekD. Symptom-based therapy with over-the-counter agentsE. Zanamivir, 10 mg inhaled bid for 5 days
IV-54.   One month after receiving a 14-day course of omep-
razole, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin for Helicobacter
pylori –associated gastric ulcer disease, a 44-year-old
woman still has mild dyspepsia and pain after meals.What is the appropriate next step in management?
A. Empirical long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy
B. Endoscopy with biopsy to rule out gastric adenocar-
cinoma
C. H. pylori  serology testing
D. ReassuranceE. Second-line therapy for H. pylori  with omeprazole,
bismuth subsalicylate, tetracycline, and metronidazole
F. Urea breath test
IV-55.   Which of the following medications used as antimy-
cobacterial drugs require dose reduction for patients withan estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate <30 mL/min? 
A. Isoniazid
B. PyrazinamideC. RifabutinD. RifampinE. Streptomycin
IV-56.   Which of the following statements regarding the
currently licensed human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine(Gardasil) is true?
A. It does not protect against genital warts.
B. It is an inactivated live virus vaccine.C. It is targeted towards all oncogenic strains of HPV
but is only 70% effective at decreasing infection inan individual.
D. Once sexually active, women will derive little pro-
tective beneﬁt from the vaccine.
E. Vaccinees should continue to receive standard Pap
smear testing.
IV-57.   A 25-year-old woman presents with 1 day of fever to
38.3°C (101°F), sore throat, dysphagia, and a number ofgrayish-white papulovesicular lesions on the soft palate,uvula, and anterior pillars of the tonsils (Figure IV-57,Color Atlas). The patient is most likely infected withwhich of the following?A. Candida albicans
B. CoxsackievirusC. HerpesvirusD. HIVE. Staphylococcus lugdunensis
IV-58.   There is wide concern among many members of the
general public regarding which of the following vaccinesas a potential cause of autism?
A. DTap (diphtheria and tetanus toxoid and acellular
pertussis) vaccine
B. Hepatitis B vaccine
C. Hib (Haemophilus inﬂuenza type b) vaccine
D. Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccineE. Measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine
IV-59.   A 19-year-old female from Guatemala presents to
your ofﬁce for a routine screening physical examination.At age 4 years she was diagnosed with acute rheumaticfever. She does not recall the speciﬁcs of her illness andremembers only that she was required to be on bed restfor 6 months. She has remained on penicillin V orally ata dose of 250 mg bid since that time. She asks if she cansafely discontinue this medication. She has had only oneother ﬂare of her disease, at age 8, when she stopped tak-ing penicillin at the time of her emigration to the UnitedStates. She is currently working as a day care provider.Her physical examination is notable for normal point ofmaximal impulse (PMI) with a grade III/VI holosystolicmurmur that is heard best at the apex of the heart andradiates to the axilla. What do you advise the patient todo?
A. An echocardiogram should be performed to deter-
mine the extent of valvular damage before deciding
if penicillin can be discontinued.
B. Penicillin prophylaxis can be discontinued because
she has had no ﬂares in 5 years.
C. She should change her dosing regimen to IM benza-
thine penicillin every 8 weeks.
D. She should continue on penicillin indeﬁnitely as she
had a previous recurrence, has presumed rheumaticheart disease, and is working in a ﬁeld with high oc-cupational exposure to group A streptococcus.
E. She should replace penicillin prophylaxis with poly-
valent pneumococcal vaccine every 5 years.
IV-60.   In a patient with bacterial endocarditis, which of the
following echocardiographic lesions is most likely to leadto embolization?
A. 5-mm mitral valve vegetation
B. 5-mm tricuspid valve vegetationC. 11-mm aortic valve vegetationD. 11-mm mitral valve vegetationE. 11-mm tricuspid valve vegetationIV-57. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 111
IV-61.   T esting for latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infec-
tion is indicated in HIV patients at the time of initial di-
agnosis for all of the following reasons except
A. Active tuberculosis treatment success rates are lower
in HIV-infected patients compared to HIV-unin-fected patients.
B. Drug interactions between drug regimens for active
tuberculosis therapy and highly active antiretroviraltherapy are challenging to manage.
C. HIV-associated active tuberculosis is more likely to
be extrapulmonary and can be diagnostically chal-lenging.
D. HIV-infected patients with active tuberculosis have
high 6-month HIV-related mortality rates.
E. The rate of progression from latent tuberculosis to
active tuberculosis is higher in HIV-infected personscompared to HIV-uninfected persons.
IV-62.   A 19-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment with 4 days of watery diarrhea, nausea, vomit-ing, and low-grade fever. He recalls no unusual meals,
sick contacts, or travel. He is hydrated with IV ﬂuid, given
antiemetics and discharged home after feeling much bet-ter. Three days later two out of three blood cultures arepositive for  Clostridium perfringens . He is called at home
and says that he feels ﬁne and is back to work. Whatshould your next instruction to the patient be? 
A. Return for IV penicillin therapy
B. Return for IV penicillin therapy plus echocardiogramC. Return for IV penicillin therapy plus colonoscopyD. Return for surveillance blood cultureE. Reassurance
IV-63.   All of the following are clinical manifestations of As-
caris lumbricoides infection except
A. asymptomatic carriageB. fever, headache, photophobia, nuchal rigidity, and
eosinophilia
C. nonproductive cough and pleurisy with eosinophiliaD. right upper quadrant pain and feverE. small-bowel obstruction
IV-64.   In the developed world, seroprevalence of Helico-
bacter pylori infection is currently
A. decreasingB. increasingC. staying the sameD. unknown
IV-65.   An 87-year-old nursing home resident is brought by
ambulance to a local emergency room. He is obtundedand ill-appearing. Per nursing home staff, the patient hasexperienced low-grade temperatures, poor appetite, andlethargy over several days. A lumbar puncture is per-formed, and the Gram stain returns gram-positive rodsand many white blood cells. Listeria  meningitis is diag-
nosed and appropriate antibiotics are begun. Which ofthe following best describes a clinical difference betweenListeria  and other causes of bacterial meningitis?
A. More frequent nuchal rigidity.B. More neutrophils are present on the cerebrospinal
ﬂuid (CSF) differential.
C. Photophobia is more common.D. Presentation is often more subacute.E. White blood cell (WBC) count is often more ele-
vated in the CSF.
IV-66.   Which of the following antibiotics has the weakest
association with the development of Clostridium difﬁcile –
associated disease?
A. Ceftriaxone
B. CiproﬂoxacinC. ClindamycinD. MoxiﬂoxacinE. Piperacillin/tazobactam
IV-67.   All of the following statements regarding human T
cell lymphotropic virus-I (HTLV-I) infection are trueexcept
A. Acute T cell leukemia is associated with HTLV-I in-
fection.
B. HTLV-I endemic regions include southern Japan,
the Caribbean, and South America.
C. HTLV-I infection is associated with a gradual de-
cline in T cell function and immunosuppression.
D. HTLV-I is transmitted parenterally, sexually, and
from mother to child.
E. Tropical spastic paraparesis is associated with
HTLV-I infection.
IV-68.   A 33-year-old woman is undergoing consolidation
chemotherapy for acute myelocytic leukemia with cytara-
bine plus daunorubicin. She developed a fever 5 daysprior which has persisted despite the addition of cefepimeand vancomycin to her prophylactic antibiotic regimen ofnorﬂoxacin, ﬂuconazole, and acyclovir. Other than dia-phoresis and chills during her periodic fevers, she re-mains largely asymptomatic except for a general sense ofmalaise and nausea associated with her chemotherapy, aswell as oral pain due to mucositis. She remains neutro-penic despite administration of hematopoietic growthfactors. Blood, urine, and sputum cultures all remainnegative. What is the next step in her management?
A. Addition of metronidazole
B. Addition of tobramycinC. Change ﬂuconazole to caspofunginD. Chest roentgenogramE. High-resolution CT plus serum galactomannan en-
zyme immunoassayIV-65. (Continued)
112 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-69.   Which of the following organisms is most likely to
cause infection of a shunt implanted for the treatment of
hydrocephalus?
A. Bacteroides fragilis
B. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
C. Escherichia coli
D. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Staphylococcus epidermidis
IV-70.   A 3-year-old boy is brought by his parents to clinic.
They state that he has experienced fevers, anorexia, weight
loss, and, most recently, has started wheezing at night. Hehad been completely healthy until these symptoms started2 months ago. The family had travelled through Europeseveral months prior and reported no unusual exposuresor exotic foods. They have a puppy at home. On examina-tion, the child is ill-appearing and is noted to have hepato-splenomegaly. Laboratory results show a panic value of82% eosinophils. T otal white blood cells are elevated. Acomplete blood count is repeated to rule out a laboratoryerror and eosinophils are 78%. Which of the following isthe most likely organism or process?
A. Cysticercus
B. Giardiasis
C. Staphylococcus lugdunensis
D. T oxocariasisE. Trichinellosis
IV-71.   An otherwise healthy 5-year-old child presents with
low-grade fevers, sore throat, and red, itchy eyes. He at-tends summer camp, where several other campers wereill. On examination, the patient is noted to have pharyn-gitis and bilateral conjunctivitis. Which of the following isthe most likely etiologic agent?
A. Adenovirus
B. EnterovirusC. Inﬂuenza virusD. MetapneumovirusE. Rhinovirus
IV-72.   A 35-year-old male is seen 6 months after a cadav-
eric renal allograft. The patient has been on azathioprineand prednisone since that procedure. He has felt poorlyfor the past week with fever to 38.6°C (101.5°F), anorexia,and a cough productive of thick sputum. Chest x-ray re-veals a left lower lobe (5 cm) nodule with central cavita-tion. Examination of the sputum reveals long, crooked,branching, beaded gram-positive ﬁlaments. The most ap-propriate initial therapy would include the administra-tion of which of the following antibiotics?
A. Ceftazidime
B. ErythromycinC. PenicillinD. SulﬁsoxazoleE. T obramycinIV-73.   A 53-year-old male with a history of alcoholism pre-
sents with an enlarging mass at the angle of the jaw. Thepatient describes the mass slowly enlarging over a periodof 6 weeks with occasional associated pain. He has alsonoted intermittent fevers throughout this period. Re-cently, he has developed yellowish drainage from the infe-rior portion of the mass. He takes no medications and hasno other past history. He drinks six beers daily. On physi-cal examination, the patient has a temperature of 37.9°C(100.2°F). His dentition is poor. There is diffuse soft tis-sue swelling and induration at the angle of the mandibleon the left. It is mildly tender, and no discrete mass is pal-pable. The area of swelling is ~8 × 8 cm. An aspirate is
sent for Gram stain and culture. The culture initiallygrows Eikenella corrodens . After 7 days you receive a call
reporting growth of a gram-positive bacillus branching atacute angles on anaerobic media. What organism is caus-ing this man’s clinical presentation?
A. Actinomyces
B. Eikenella corrodens
C. Mucormycosis
D. Nocardia
E. Peptostreptococcus
IV-74.   What is the most appropriate therapy for this patient?
A. Amphotericin B
B. ItraconazoleC. PenicillinD. Surgical debridementE. T obramycin
IV-75.   A 40-year-old male smoker with a history of asthma
is admitted to the inpatient medical service with fever,cough, brownish-green sputum, and malaise. Physical ex-amination shows a respiratory rate of 15, no use of acces-sory muscles of breathing, and bilateral polyphonicwheezes throughout the lung ﬁelds. There is no clubbingor skin lesions. Y ou consider a diagnosis of allergic bron-chopulmonary aspergillosis. All the following clinicalfeatures are consistent with allergic bronchopulmonaryaspergillosis except
A. bilateral, peripheral cavitary lung inﬁltratesB. elevated serum IgEC. peripheral eosinophiliaD. positive serum antibodies to Aspergillus  species
E. positive skin testing for Aspergillus  species
IV-76.   All of the following factors increase the risk for Clos-
tridium difﬁcile –associated disease except
A. antacidsB. antecedent antibioticsC. C. difﬁcile  colonization
D. enteral tube feedsE. increasing length of hospital stayF. older age
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 113
IV-77.   A 19-year-old man presents to an urgent care clinic
with urethral discharge. He reports three new female sex-
ual partners over the past 2 months. What should hismanagement be?
A. Nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test for Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae and  Chlamydia trachomatis  and return to
clinic in 2 days
B. Cefpodoxime, 400 mg PO × 1, and azithromycin, 1g
PO× 1 for the patient and his partners
C. Nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test for N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis plus  cefpodoxime, 400 mg PO ×
1, and azithromycin, 1 g PO × 1, for the patient
D. Nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test for N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis plus  cefpodoxime, 400 mg PO ×
1, and azithromycin, 1g PO × 1, for the patient and
his recent partners
E. Nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test for N. gonorrhoeae
and C. trachomatis plus  cefpodoxime, 400 mg PO ×
1, azithromycin, 1g PO × 1, and ﬂagyl, 2 g PO × 1,
for the patient and his partners
IV-78.   During the ﬁrst 2 weeks following solid organ trans-
plantation, which family of infection is most common?A. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) reactivation
B. Humoral immunodeﬁciency–associated infections
(e.g., meningococcemia, invasive Streptococcus pneu-
moniae  infection)
C. Neutropenia-associated infection (e.g., aspergillosis,
candidemia)
D. T cell deﬁciency–associated infections (e.g., Pneu-
mocystis jiroveci , nocardiosis, cryptococcosis)
E. Typical hospital-acquired infections (e.g., central
line infection, hospital-acquired pneumonia, uri-
nary tract infection)
IV-79.   A 19-year-old college student is brought to the
emergency department by friends from his dormitory forconfusion and altered mental status. They state that manycolleagues have upper respiratory tract infections. Hedoes not use alcohol or illicit drugs. His physical exami-nation is notable for confusion, fever, and a rigid neck.Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) examination reveals a whiteblood cell count of 1800 cells/ µL with 98% neutrophils,
glucose of 1.9 mmol/L (35 mg/dL), and protein of 1.0 g/L(100 mg/dL). Which of the following antibiotic regimensis most appropriate as initial therapy?
A. Ampicillin plus vancomycin
B. Ampicillin plus gentamicinC. Cefazolin plus doxycyclineD. Cefotaxime plus doxycyclineE. Cefotaxime plus vancomycin
IV-80.   In addition to antibiotics, which of the following ad-
junctive therapies should be administered to improve thechance of a favorable neurologic outcome?A. DexamethasoneB. DilantinC. GabapentinD.
L-Dopa
E. Parenteral nutrition
IV-81.   Which of the following viruses is the leading cause
of respiratory disease in infants and children?
A. Adenovirus
B. EnterovirusC. Human respiratory syncytial virusD. Parainﬂuenza virusE. Rhinovirus
IV-82.   Several family members present to a local emer-
gency room 2 days after a large family summer picnicwhere deli meats and salads were served. They all com-plain of profuse diarrhea, headaches, fevers, and myal-gias. Their symptoms began ~24 h after the picnic. It
appears that everyone who ate Aunt Emma’s bologna sur-prise was afﬂicted. Routine cultures of blood and stoolare negative to date. Which of the following is true re-garding Listeria  gastroenteritis?
A. Antibiotic treatment is not necessary for uncompli-
cated cases.
B. Carriers are asymptomatic but can easily spread in-
fection via the fecal-oral route.
C. Gastrointestinal (GI) illness can result from inges-
tion of a single organism.
D. Illness is toxin-mediated, and organisms are not
present at the time of infection.
E. Person-to-person spread is a common cause of out-
breaks.
IV-83.   Which clinical entity is the most difﬁcult to distin-
guish from osteomyelitis in a diabetic foot on any cur-rently available medical imaging (plain ﬁlm, CT, MRI,ultrasound, and three-phase bone scan)?
A. Abscess
B. CellulitisC. FractureD. Neuropathic osteopathyE. Tumor
IV-84.   The human enterovirus family includes poliovirus,
coxsackieviruses, enteroviruses, and echovirus. Which ofthe following statements regarding viral infection withone of the members of this group is true?
A. Among children infected with poliovirus, paralysis
is common.
B. Enteroviruses cannot be transmitted via blood
transfusions and insect bites.
C. In utero exposure to maternal enteroviral antibodies
is not protective.IV-80.   (Continued)
114 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
D. Infections are most common in adolescents and
adults, though serious illness is most common in
young children.
E. Paralysis from poliovirus infection was more com-
monly seen in developing countries.
IV-85.   Which of the following sexually transmitted infec-
tions (STIs) is the most common in the United States?
A. Gonorrhea
B. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) 2 infectionC. HIV-1 infectionD. Human papilloma virus infectionE. Syphilis
IV-86.   A 38-year-old woman presents to the emergency de-
partment with severe abdominal pain. She has no pastmedical or surgical history. She recalls no recent historyof abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, melena, bright redblood per rectum, nausea, or vomiting prior to this acuteepisode. She ate ceviche (lime-marinated raw ﬁsh) at aPeruvian restaurant 3 h prior to presentation. On exami-nation, she is in terrible distress and has dry heaves. T em-perature is 37.6°C; heart rate is 128 beats per minute;
blood pressure is 174/92 mmHg. Examination is notable
for an extremely tender abdomen with guarding and re-bound tenderness. Bowel sounds are present and hyper-active. Rectal examination is normal and guaiac test isnegative. Pelvic examination is unremarkable. Whiteblood cell count is 6738/ µL; hematocrit is 42%. A com-
plete metabolic panel and lipase and amylase levels are allwithin normal limits. CT of the abdomen shows no ab-normality. What is the next step in her management?
A. CT angiogram of the abdomen
B. Pelvic ultrasonographyC. Proton pump inhibitor therapy and observationD. Right upper quadrant ultrasonographyE. Upper endoscopy
IV-87.   Which of the following clinical features can be used
to rule out malaria in favor of another tropical febrile ill-ness in a returning traveler?
A. Diarrhea
B. Lack of paroxysmal nature of the feversC. Lack of splenomegalyD. Severe myalgias and retroorbital headacheE. None of the above
IV-88.   Which of the following serology patterns places a
transplant recipient at the lowest risk of developing cyto-megalovirus (CMV) infection after renal transplantation?
A. Donor CMV IgG negative, recipient CMV IgG negative
B. Donor CMV IgG negative, recipient CMV IgG positiveC. Donor CMV IgG positive, recipient CMV IgG negativeD. Donor CMV IgG positive, recipient CMV IgG positiveE. The risk is equal regardless of serology resultsIV-89.   Which of the following statements regarding liver
abscesses is true?
A. Amebic liver abscess should be ruled out only by di-
rect sampling and culture of pus.
B. Alkaline phosphatase is the most likely liver function
test to be abnormal in the presence of a liver abscess.
C. Candida  species are most commonly isolated from
patients with abscesses that develop as a result of
peritoneal or pelvic pathology.
D. Patients with liver abscesses nearly always have right
upper quadrant pain.
E. All of the above are true.
IV-90.   All of the following antifungal medications may be
used for the treatment of Candida albicans  fungemia except
A. amphotericin BB. caspofunginC. ﬂuconazoleD. terbinaﬁneE. voriconazole
IV-91.   A 40-year-old male is admitted to the hospital with
2–3 weeks of fever, tender lymph nodes, and right upperquadrant abdominal pain. He reports progressive weightloss and malaise over a year. On examination, he isfound to be febrile and frail with temporal wasting andoral thrush. Matted, tender anterior cervical lymphade-nopathy <1 cm and tender hepatomegaly are noted. He
is diagnosed with AIDS (CD4+ lymphocyte count =12/µ L and HIV RNA 650,000 copies/mL). Blood cul-
tures grow Mycobacterium avium . He is started on rifab-
utin and clarithromycin, as well as dapsone forPneumocystis  prophylaxis, and discharged home 2 weeks
later after his fevers subside. He follows up with an HIVprovider 4 weeks later and is started on tenofovir,emtricitabine and efavirenz. Two weeks later he returnsto clinic with fevers, neck pain, and abdominal pain. His
temperature is 39.2°C, heart rate is 110 beats perminute, blood pressure is 110/64 mmHg, and oxygensaturations are normal. His cervical nodes are now 2centimeters in size and extremely tender, and one hasﬁstulized to his skin and is draining yellow pus that isacid-fast bacillus stain–positive. His hepatomegaly ispronounced and tender. What is the most likely  explana-
tion for his presentation?
A. Cryptococcal meningitis
B. HIV treatment failureC. Immune reconstitution syndrome to Mycobacterium
avium
D. Kaposi’s sarcomaE. Mycobacterium avium  treatment failure due to drug
resistance
IV-92.   Which of the following statements regarding pre-
vention of human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV) in-fection in children is true?IV-84. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 115
A. All children who are admitted to the hospital more
than twice a year should be vaccinated against
HRSV .
B. Barrier precautions remain the only effective means
of prevention.
C. Children should be vaccinated at birth.D. Inactivated, whole-virus vaccine should be consid-
ered in children <2 years old.
E. RSV immune globulin should be given monthly to
children <2 years old who were born prematurely.
IV-93.   A 52-year-old woman with alcoholic cirrhosis, portal
hypertension, esophageal varices, and history of hepatic en-cephalopathy presents to the hospital with confusion overseveral days. Her husband remarks that the patient has been
adherent to her medicines. These medicines include labet-alol, furosemide, aldactone, and lactulose. Physical exami-nation is notable for temperature of 38.3°C, heart rate of115 bpm, blood pressure of 105/62 mmHg, respiratory rateof 12 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 96% onroom air. The patient is extremely drowsy, only intermit-tently able to answer questions, and disoriented. She hasslight asterixis. Lungs are clear. Cardiac examination is un-remarkable. Her abdomen is distended and tense but non-tender. She has 3+ lower extremity edema extending to herthighs. She is guaiac negative. Her cranial nerves and ex-
tremity strength are symmetric and normal. Laboratorystudies reveal a leukocyte count of 4830/ µL, hematocrit =
33% (baseline = 30%), and platelet count of 94,000/µL. Ba-sic metabolic panel is unremarkable. What is an essentialcomponent of the diagnostic workup?
A. CT scan of the head
B. EsophagastroduodenoscopyC. ParacentesisD. Therapeutic trial of lactuloseE. Serum ammonia level
IV-94.   A 64-year-old female is admitted to the hospital with
altered mental status. She recently returned from a summerwhite-water rafting trip in Colorado. Her husband reportsincreasing confusion, alternating lethargy and agitation,and visual hallucinations over the past 3 days. There is nohistory of drug abuse or psychiatric illness. She takes nomedications. Her physical examination is notable for atemperature of 39°C (102.2°F), myoclonic jerks, and hyper-reﬂexia. She is delirious and oriented to person only whenaroused. There is no nuchal rigidity. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid(CSF) examination reveals clear ﬂuid with a white bloodcell count of 15 cells/ µL with 100% lymphocytes, protein of
1.0 g/L (100 mg/dL), and glucose of 4.4 mmol/L (80 mg/dL). Gram stain of the CSF shows no organisms. Y ou sus-pect infection with West Nile virus. Which of the followingstudies will be most useful in making that diagnosis?
A. CSF culture
B. CSF IgM antibodiesC. CNS MRID. CSF PCRE. Stool culture
IV-95.   Which of the following represents a rare but serious
extrapulmonary complication of inﬂuenza infection?
A. Diffuse eczematous rash
B. MyositisC. OligoarthritisD. Purulent conjunctivitisE. Secondary bacterial pneumonia caused by Staphylo-
coccus aureus
IV-96.   Y ou are a physician for an undergraduate university
health clinic in Arizona. Y ou have evaluated three studentswith similar complaints of fever, malaise, diffuse arthral-gias, cough without hemoptysis, and chest discomfort, andone of the patients has a skin rash on her extremities con-sistent with erythema multiforme. Chest radiography issimilar in all three, with hilar adenopathy and small pleuraleffusions. Upon further questioning you learn that all threestudents are in the same archaeology class and participatedin an excavation 1 week ago. Y our leading diagnosis is
A. mononucleosis
B. primary pulmonary aspergillosisC. primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosisD. primary pulmonary histoplasmosisE. streptococcal pneumonia
IV-97.   A 34-year-old recent immigrant from Burundi pre-
sents with fever, headache, severe myalgias, photophobia,conjunctival injection, and prostration. He lived in a ref-ugee camp for the previous 10 years. In the camp, he wastreated for several unknown febrile illnesses. Since arriv-
ing in the United States 7 years ago, he has worked as acomputer analyst and lived only in a metropolitan North-west city with no signiﬁcant travel. Initial blood culturesare negative. Five days into the illness he develops hy-potension, pneumonitis, encephalopathy, and gangreneof his distal digits as well as a petechial, hemorrhagic rashover his entire body except for his face. A biopsy of hisrash reveals immunohistochemical changes consistentwith a rickettsial infection. Which of the following rick-ettsial pathogens is most likely in this patient?
A. Coxiella burnetii  (Q fever)
B. Rickettsia africae  (African tick-borne fever)
C. Rickettsia prowazekii (Louse-borne typhus)
D. Rickettsia rickettsii  (Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
E. Rickettsia typhi  (Murine typhus)
IV-98.   Y ou are the on-call physician practicing in a subur-
ban community. Y ou receive a call from a 28-year-old
female with a past medical history signiﬁcant forsarcoidosis who is currently on no medications. She iscomplaining of the acute onset of crampy diffuse abdom-IV-94. (Continued) IV-92. (Continued)
116 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
inal pain and multiple episodes of emesis that are non-
bloody. She has not had any light-headedness withstanding or loss of consciousness. When questioned fur-ther, the patient states that her last meal was 5 h previ-ously, when she joined her friends for lunch at a localChinese restaurant. She ate from the buffet, which in-cluded multiple poultry dishes and fried rice. Whatshould you do for this patient?
A. Ask the patient to go to the nearest emergency de-
partment for resuscitation with IV ﬂuids.
B. Initiate antibiotic therapy with azithromycin.
C. Reassure the patient that her illness is self-limited
and no further treatment is necessary if she canmaintain adequate hydration.
D. Refer the patient for CT to assess for appendicitis.E. Refer the patient for admission for IV vancomycin
and ceftriaxone because of her immunocompro-mised state resulting from sarcoidosis.
IV-99. Borrelia burgdorferi  serology testing is indicated for
which of the following patients, all of whom reside inLyme-endemic regions?
A. A 19-year-old female camp counselor who presents
with her second episode of an inﬂamed, red and
tender left knee and right ankle
B. A 23-year-old male house painter who presents with
a primary erythema migrans lesion at the site of awitnessed tick bite
C. A 36-year-old female state park ranger who presents
with a malar rash, diffuse arthralgias/arthritis of hershoulders, knees, metacarpophalangeal and proxi-mal interphalangeal joints; pericarditis; and acuteglomerulonephritis
D. A 42-year-old woman with chronic fatigue, myal-
gias, and arthralgias
E. A 46-year-old male gardener who presents with fe-
vers, malaise, migratory arthralgias/myalgias, andthree erythema migrans lesions
IV-100.   A 39-year-old injection drug user with a history of
right-sided endocarditis and HIV infection notes backpain and fevers over the past week. He had an abscess re-cently on his right arm that he drained on his own. He ispart of a needle-exchange program and always cleans hisarm before shooting heroin into the vein in his antecu-bital fossa. On physical examination, he has a tempera-ture of 38.1°C, heart rate of 124 beats per minute, andblood pressure of 75/30 mmHg. He is in a great deal ofdistress and is slightly confused. He has a 4/6 left lower
sternal border murmur that varies with the respiratorycycle. His jugular venous pressure is monophasic and tothe jaw when seated at 90 degrees. Lung examination isclear. Abdomen is benign. He is very tender over his lowerspine. His extremities are warm. Leg strength is 5/5 on theright, with 4/5 left hip ﬂexion and extension, 3/5 left kneeﬂexion and extension, and 3/5 left foot extension. HisBabinski reﬂex is upgoing on the left and downgoing onthe right. What is the next step in management?
A. Avoidance of antibiotics until more deﬁnitive cul-
ture data is obtained; serial neurologic examinations
B. Urgent MRI and neurosurgical consultation; vanco-
mycin after blood cultures are drawn
C. Urgent MRI and neurosurgical consultation; vanco-
mycin plus cefepime after blood cultures are drawn
D. Urgent MRI and neurosurgical consultation; avoid-
ance of antibiotics until more deﬁnitive culture data
are obtained
E. Vancomycin plus cefepime after blood cultures are
drawn; serial neurologic examinations
IV-101.   An HIV-positive patient with a CD4 count of 110/
µL who is not taking any medications presents to an ur-gent care center with complaints of a headache for thepast week. He also notes nausea and intermittentlyblurred vision. Examination is notable for normal vitalsigns without fever but mild papilledema. Head CT doesnot show dilated ventricles. The deﬁnitive diagnostic testfor this patient is
A. cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) culture
B. MRI with gadolinium imagingC. ophthalmologic examination including visual ﬁeld
testing
D. serum cryptococcal antigen testingE. urine culture
IV-102.   Which of the following favors a diagnosis of acute
bacterial epididymitis?
A. A solid nontender testicular mass
B. Absence of blood ﬂow on Doppler examinationC. Concurrent urethral dischargeD. Elevation of the testicle within the scrotal sacE. Lack of response to ceftriaxone plus doxycycline
therapy
IV-103.   A 19-year-old woman comes to your ofﬁce after be-
ing bitten by a bat on the ear while camping in a primitiveshelter. She is unable to produce a vaccination record. On
physical examination, she is afebrile and appears well. Thereare two small puncture marks on the pinna of her left ear.What is an appropriate vaccination strategy in this context?
A. Intravenous ribavirin
B. No vaccinationC. Rabies immunoglobulinsD. Rabies inactivated virus vaccineE. Rabies inactivated virus vaccine plus immunoglob-
ulins
IV-104.   A 26-year-old woman during a clinic is found to
have a positive rapid plasmin reagin test (1:4) and a posi-tive ﬂuorescent treponemal antibody-absorption testIV-100. (Continued) IV-98. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 117
(FTA-ABS). She has never been treated for syphilis. She
recalls a large painless ulcer on her labia 9 months prior,
followed about 2 months later by a diffuse rash and orallesions that also resolved. She has had ﬁve sexual contactsin the past year. In addition to treating the patient, all ofthe following additional interventions should be consid-ered except
A. echocardiogram looking at the aortic archB. HIV counseling and testingC. pregnancy testingD. screening and treatment of all recent sexual contactsE. screening for other sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs)
IV-105.   Per-coital rate of HIV acquisition in a man who
has unprotected sexual intercourse with an HIV-infectedfemale partner is likely to increase under which of the fol-lowing circumstances?
A. Acute HIV infection in the female partner
B. Female herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 positive se-
rostatus
C. Male nongonococcal urethritis at the time of inter-
course
D. Uncircumcised male statusE. All of the above
IV-106.   All of the following are associated with increased
risk of pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID) except
A. bacterial vaginosisB. history of salpingitisC. intrauterine deviceD. recent sexual exposure to a man with urethritisE. symptoms beginning on days 14–21 of the men-
strual cycle
IV-107.   Current Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) recommendations are that screening for HIVbe performed in which of the following?
A. All high-risk groups (injection drug users, men who
have sex with men, and high-risk heterosexual women)
B. All U.S. adults
C. Injection drug usersD. Men who have sex with menE. Women who have sex with more than two men per year
IV-108.   A 26-year-old woman presents late in the third tri-
mester of her pregnancy with high fevers, myalgias, back-ache, and malaise. She is admitted and started on empiricalbroad-spectrum antibiotics. Blood cultures return positiveforListeria monocytogenes . She delivers a 5-lb infant 24 h
after admission. Which of the following statements regard-ing antibiotic treatment for this infection is true?
A. Clindamycin should be used in patients with peni-
cillin allergy.B. Neonates should receive weight-based ampicillin
and gentamicin.
C. Penicillin plus gentamicin is ﬁrst-line therapy for
the mother.
D. Quinolones should be used for Listeria  bacteremia
in late-stage pregnancy.
E. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole has no efﬁcacy
against Listeria .
IV-109.   Glucocorticoids have been shown to be of beneﬁt
for treatment for all of the following infections except
A. Aspergillus fumigatus  pneumonia
B. Mycobacterium tuberculosis  pericarditis
C. Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia
D. severe typhoid fever
E. Streptococcus pneumoniae meningitis
IV-110.   A 23-year-old previously healthy female letter car-
rier works in a suburb in which the presence of rabidfoxes and skunks has been documented. She is bitten by abat, which then ﬂies away. Initial examination reveals aclean break in the skin in the right upper forearm. She hasno history of receiving treatment for rabies and is unsureabout vaccination against tetanus. The physician should
A. clean the wound with a 20% soap solution
B. clean the wound with a 20% soap solution and ad-
minister tetanus toxoid
C. clean the wound with a 20% soap solution, adminis-
ter tetanus toxoid, and administer human rabies im-mune globulin intramuscularly
D. clean the wound with a 20% soap solution, adminis-
ter tetanus toxoid, administer human rabies im-mune globulin IM, and administer human diploidcell vaccine
E. clean the wound with a 20% soap solution and ad-
minister human diploid cell vaccine
IV-111.   In a patient who has undergone a traumatic sple-
nectomy, what test can be ordered to establish lack ofsplenic function?
A. CT scan of the abdomen
B. Neutrophil migration studiesC. Peripheral blood ﬂow cytometryD. Peripheral blood smear
IV-112.    A patient is admitted with fevers, malaise, and diffuse
joint pains. His initial blood cultures reveal methicillin-resis-
tant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) in all culture bottles. He
has no arthritis on examination, and his renal function isnormal. Echocardiogram shows a 5-mm vegetation on theaortic valve. He is initiated on IV vancomycin at 15 mg/kgevery 12 h. Four days later the patient remains febrile andcultures remain positive for MRSA. In addition to a searchfor embolic foci of infection, which of the following changeswould you make to his treatment regimen?IV-108. (Continued) IV-104. (Continued)
118 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
A. No change
B. Add gentamicinC. Add rifampinD. Check the vancomycin serum peak and trough lev-
els and consider tid dosing
E. Discontinue vancomycin, start daptomycin
IV-113.   A 23-year-old woman develops cytomegalovirus
(CMV) pneumonitis 5 months after a lung transplant.She developed severe side effects from ganciclovir whilereceiving prophylaxis. Foscarnet is prescribed for this epi-sode. Which of the following side effects is most likely?
A. Bone marrow suppression
B. Electrolyte wastingC. Embryotoxic D. Lethargy and tremorsE. Hyperkalemia
IV-114.   A 38-year-old woman is seen in clinic for a de-
crease in cognitive and executive function. Her husbandis concerned because she is no longer able to pay bills,keep appointments, or remember important dates. She
also seems to derive considerably less pleasure from car-ing for her children and her hobbies. She is unable toconcentrate for long enough to enjoy movies. This is aclear change from her functional status 6 months prior. A
workup reveals a positive HIV antibody by enzyme im-munoassay and Western blot. Her CD4+ lymphocytecount is 378/ µL with a viral load of 78,000/mL. She is afe-
brile with normal vital signs. Her affect is blunted, and
she seems disinterested in the medical interview. Neuro-
logic examination for strength, sensation, cerebellar func-tion and cranial nerve function is nonfocal. Fundoscopicexamination is normal. Mini-Mental Status Examinationscore is 22/30. A serum rapid plasmin reagin (RPR) test isnegative. MRI of the brain shows only cerebral atrophydisproportionate to her age but no focal lesions. What isthe next step in her management?
A. Antiretroviral therapy
B. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) JV virus polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)
C. CSF mycobacterial PCRD. CSF VDRL testE. Serum cryptococcal antigenF. Toxoplasma IgG
IV-115.   A 72-year-old male is admitted to the hospital with
bacteremia and pyelonephritis. He is HIV-negative andhas no other signiﬁcant past medical history. Two weeksinto his treatment with antibiotics a fever evaluation re-veals a blood culture positive for Candida albicans . Exam-
ination is unremarkable. White blood cell count isnormal. The central venous catheter is removed, and sys-temic antifungal agents are initiated. What further evalu-ation is recommended?A. Abdominal CT scan to evaluate for abscessB. Chest x-rayC. Funduscopic examinationD. Repeat blood culturesE. Transthoracic echocardiogram
IV-116.   A 40-year-old man with HIV (CD4+ lymphocyte
count = 180, viral load = 1000 copies/mL) was treated forsecondary syphilis based on generalized painless lym-phadenopathy, a diffuse maculopapular rash that in-cluded his palms and soles, and a preceding primarygenital chancre. He reported no neurologic or ophthal-
mic symptoms at the time and received one dose of IMpenicillin G benzathine. At the time of diagnosis, hisrapid plasmin reagin (RPR) titer was 1:64 and ﬂuorescenttreponemal antibody-absorption (FTA-ABS) test waspositive. He follows up a year later and is found to havean RPR titer of 1:64 and his FTA-ABS remains positive.What is the appropriate intervention at this time?
A. Aqueous penicillin G 24 mU/d IV given as 4 mU
q4h× 10 days 
B. Doxycycline, 100 mg PO bid
C. Lumbar punctureD. Penicillin desensitizationE. Penicillin G benzathine 2.4 mU IM weekly × 3 doses 
IV-117.   A 26-year-old female college student presents with
tender epitrochlear and axillary tender, ﬁrm, 3-cm lymphnodes on her left side. She has a 0.5-cm painless noduleon her left second ﬁnger. She reports low-grade fever andmalaise over 2 weeks. She enjoys gardening, exotic ﬁshcollecting, and owns several pets including ﬁsh, kittens,and a puppy. She is sexually active with one partner. She
traveled extensively throughout rural Southeast Asia 2years before her current illness. The differential diagnosisincludes all of the following except
A. Bartonella henselae infection
B. lymphomaC. Sporothrix schenkii  infection
D. Staphylococcal  infection
IV-118.   A person with liver disease caused by Schistosoma
mansoni  would be most likely to have
A. ascitesB. esophageal varicesC. gynecomastiaD. jaundiceE. spider nevi
IV-119.   A previously healthy 28-year-old male describes
several episodes of fever, myalgia, and headache thathave been followed by abdominal pain and diarrhea. Hehas experienced up to 10 bowel movements per day.Physical examination is unremarkable. Laboratory ﬁnd-ings are notable only for a slightly elevated leukocyteIV-115. (Continued) IV-112. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 119
count and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Wright’s stain of a fecal sample reveals the presence ofneutrophils. Colonoscopy reveals inﬂamed mucosa. Bi-opsy of an affected area discloses mucosal inﬁltrationwith neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils; epithelialdamage, including loss of mucus; glandular degenera-tion; and crypt abscesses. The patient notes that severalmonths ago he was at a church barbecue where severalpeople contracted a diarrheal illness. Although this pa-tient could have inﬂammatory bowel disease, which ofthe following pathogens is most likely to be responsiblefor his illness?
A. Campylobacter
B. Escherichia coli
C. Norwalk agent
D. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Salmonella
IV-120.   Deﬁcits in the complement membrane attack com-
plex (C5-8) are associated with recurrent infections ofwhat variety?
A. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
B. Catalase-positive bacteria
C. Streptococcus pneumoniae
D. Salmonella  spp.
E. Neisseria meningitis
IV-121.   A previously healthy 17-year-old woman pre-
sents in early October with profound fatigue and mal-aise, as well as fevers, headache, nuchal rigidity, diffusearthralgias, and a rash. She lives in a small town inMassachusetts and spent her summer as a camp coun-selor at a local day camp. She participated in daily hikesin the woods but did not travel outside of the area dur-ing the course of the summer. Physical examination re-veals a well-developed young woman who appearsextremely fatigued but not in extremis. Her tempera-ture is 37.4°C; pulse is 86 beats per minute; bloodpressure is 96/54 mmHg; respiratory rate is 12 breathsper minute. Physical examination documents clearbreath sounds, no cardiac rub or murmur, normalbowel sounds, a nontender abdomen, no organomeg-aly, and no evidence of synovitis. Several cutaneous le-sions are noted on her lower extremities, bilateralaxillae, right thigh, and left groin (Figure IV-121, ColorAtlas). All of the following are possible complicationsof her current disease state except
A. Bell’s palsyB. large joint oligoarticular arthritisC. meningitisD. progressive dementiaE. third-degree heart block
IV-122.   In the patient described above, which of the fol-
lowing is appropriate therapy?A. Azithromycin, 500 mg PO dailyB. Ceftriaxone, 2 g IV dailyC. Cephalexin, 500 mg PO bidD. Doxycycline, 100 mg PO bidE. Vancomycin, 1 g IV bid
IV-123.   Which of the following represents an emergent
(same day) indication for cardiac surgery in a patientwith infective endocarditis?
A. Culture-proven fungal endocarditis
B. Culture-proven resistant organism with septic pul-
monary emboli
C. Prosthetic valve endocarditis 4 months after surgeryD. Sinus of Valsalva abscess ruptured into right heartE. Staphylococcus lugdunensis  in a patient with previ-
ous history of endocarditis 
IV-124.   Which of the following pathogens are cardiac
transplant patients at unique risk for acquiring from thedonor heart early after transplant when compared toother solid organ transplant patients?
A. Cryptococcus neoformans
B. Cytomegalovirus
C. Pneumocystis jiroveci
D. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Toxoplasma gondii
IV-125.   A 68-year-old woman has been in the medical in-
tensive care unit for 10 days with a chronic obstructivepulmonary disease ﬂare and pneumonia, including theinitial 6 days on a mechanical ventilator. She just ﬁnisheda course of moxiﬂoxacin and glucocorticoid taper whenshe develops abdominal discomfort over 2 days. Vitalsigns reveal a temperature of 38.2°C, heart rate of 94 beatsper minute, blood pressure of 162/94 mmHg, respiratoryrate of 18 per minute, and oxygen saturation of 90%. On
examination, she is in moderate distress. She is not usingaccessory muscles but is tachypneic. She has a slight bilat-
eral wheeze with good air movement. Heart sounds aredistant and unchanged. Her abdomen is moderately dis-tended and tense, with scant bowel sounds present. There
is no guarding or rebound, but she is tender throughout.Review of her records reveals no bowel movement overthe past 72 h and no stool is palpable in the rectal vault.White blood cell count has increased from 7100/ µL to
38,000/µL over the past 2 days. Abdominal plain ﬁlmshows what is read as a probable ileus in the right lowerquadrant. Aside from nasogastric (NG) tube placement
with suction and NPO status, which of the followingshould your management also include?
A. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)
B. Metronidazole, 500 mg IV tidC. Piperacillin/tazobactam, 3.37 g IV q6h D. Restart moxiﬂoxacin, 400 PO qdE. Vancomycin, 500 mg PO qidIV-122. (Continued) IV-119. (Continued)
120 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-126.   A 25-year-old woman presents to the clinic com-
plaining of several days of worsening burning and pain with
urination. She describes an increase in urinary frequencyand suprapubic tenderness but no fever or back pain. Shehas no past medical history with the exception of two priorepisodes similar to this in the past 2 years. Urine analysisshows moderate white blood cells. Which of the following isthe most likely causative agent of her current symptoms?
A. Candida
B. Escherichia coli
C. Enterobacter
D. Klebsiella
E. Proteus
IV-127.   A 42-year-old man with poorly controlled diabetes
(HbA1C = 13.3%) presents with thigh pain and fever
over several weeks. Physical examination reveals ery-
thema and warmth over the thigh with notable woody,nonpitting edema. There are no cutaneous ulcers. CT of
the thigh reveals several abscesses located between themuscle ﬁbers of the thigh. Orthopedics is consulted todrain and culture the abscesses. Which of the following isthe most likely pathogen?
A. Clostridium perfringens
B. Group A Streptococcus
C. Polymicrobial ﬂoraD. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Streptococcus milleri
IV-128.   Regarding the epidemiology of inﬂuenza viruses,
which of the following is true?
A. Antigenic drift requires a change in both hemagglu-
tinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) antigens.
B. Antigenic shift is deﬁned by an exchange of hemag-
glutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) antigens be-
tween inﬂuenza A and inﬂuenza B viruses.
C. Avian inﬂuenza outbreaks in humans occur when
human inﬂuenza A viruses undergo antigenic shiftswith inﬂuenza A from poultry.
D. Inﬂuenza C virus infections, while uncommon, are
more virulent on a population basis due to its in-creased ability to undergo antigenic shift.
E. The lethality associated with avian inﬂuenza is related
to its ability to spread via person-to-person contact.
IV-129.   A 62-year-old man returns from a vacation to Ari-
zona with fever, pleurisy, and a nonproductive cough. Allof the following factors on history and laboratory exami-nation favor a diagnosis of pulmonary coccidioidomyco-sis rather than community-acquired pneumonia except
A. eosinophiliaB. erythema nodosumC. mediastinal lymphadenopathy on chest roentgenogramD. positive Coccidioides  complement ﬁxation titer
E. travel limited to Northern Arizona (Grand Canyon
area)IV-130.   A 36-year-old man with a history of hypertension
presents complaining of a 3-year history of constant fa-tigue, diffuse myalgias, and memory deﬁcits. He alsonotes trouble with routine tasks at work. He was diag-nosed with Lyme disease 4 years ago and was brieﬂy ad-mitted to a cardiac care unit for transient third-degreeheart block. Symptoms at that time included fever, mal-aise, arthralgias, diffuse erythema migrans, and facialnerve palsy. He received ceftriaxone, 2 g/d for 28 days,and had complete resolution of symptoms for severalmonths but then developed his new constellation ofproblems that have gradually worsened over time. Physi-
cal examination is totally within normal limits. Which isthe appropriate next step in management?
A. Borrelia burgdorferi  enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay
B. Ceftriaxone, 2 g daily × 1 month
C. Doxycycline, 100 mg PO daily for life
D. Prednisone, 60 mg PO dailyE. Symptomatic treatment
IV-131.   A sputum culture from a patient with cystic ﬁbro-
sis showing which of the following organisms has beenassociated with a rapid decline in pulmonary functionand a poor clinical prognosis?
A. Burkholderia cepacia
B. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
C. Staphylococcus aureus
D. Staphylococcus epidermidis
E. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
IV-132.   Empirical antibiotic therapy for continuous ambu-
latory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) patients with peritoni-
tis should be directed towards which organisms?
A. Enteric gram-negative rods
B. Enteric gram-negative rods and yeastC. Gram-positive cocciD. Gram-positive cocci plus enteric gram-negative rodsE. Gram-positive cocci plus enteric gram-negative rods
plus yeast
IV-133.   Indinavir is a protease inhibitor that carries which
side effect unique for HIV antiretroviral agents?
A. Abnormal dreams
B. Benign hyperbilirubinemiaC. Hepatic necrosis in pregnant womenD. NephrolithiasisE. Pancreatitis
IV-134.   A 28-year-old woman presents with fevers, head-
ache, diaphoresis, and abdominal pain 2 days after return-ing from an aid mission to the coast of Papua New Guinea.Several of her fellow aid workers developed malaria whileabroad, and she stopped her doxycycline prophylaxis dueto a photosensitivity reaction 5 days prior. Y ou send bloodcultures, routine labs, and a thick and thin smear to evalu-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 121
ate the source of her fevers. Which of the following state-
ments is accurate in reference to diagnosis of malaria?
A. A thick smear is performed to increase sensitivity in
comparison to a thin smear but can only be per-
formed in centers with experienced laboratory per-sonnel and has a longer processing time.
B. Careful analysis of the thin blood ﬁlm allows for
prognostication based on estimation of parasitemiaand morphology of the erythrocytes.
C. In the absence of rapid diagnostic information, empiri-
cal treatment for malaria should be strongly considered.
D. Morphology on blood smear is the current criterion
used to differentiate the four species of Plasmodium
that infect humans.
E. All of the above are true.
IV-135.   A 34-year-old injection drug user presents with a
2-day history of slurred speech, blurry vision that isworse with bilateral gaze deviation, dry mouth, and difﬁ-culty swallowing both liquids and solids. He states thathis arms feel weak as well but denies any sensory deﬁcits.He has had no recent illness but does describe a chroniculcer on his left lower leg that has felt slightly warm andtender of late. He frequently injects heroin into the edgesof the ulcer. On review of systems, he reports mild short-ness of breath but denies any gastrointestinal symptoms,urinary retention, or loss of bowel or bladder continence.Physical examination reveals a frustrated, nontoxic ap-pearing man who is alert and oriented but noticeably dys-arthric. He is afebrile with stable vital signs. Cranial nerveexamination reveals bilateral cranial nerve six deﬁcits andan inability to maintain medial gaze in both eyes. He hasmild bilateral ptosis, and both pupils are reactive butsluggish. His strength is 5/5 in all extremities except forhis shoulder shrug, which is 4/5. Sensory examinationand deep tendon reﬂexes are within normal limits in allfour extremities. His oropharynx is dry. Cardiopulmo-
nary and abdominal examinations are normal. He has a 4
cm× 5 cm well-granulated lower extremity ulcer with
redness, warmth, and erythema noted on the upper mar-gin of the ulcer. What is the treatment of choice?
A. Glucocorticoids
B. Equine antitoxin to Clostridium botulinum  neuro-
toxin
C. Intravenous heparinD. NaltrexoneE. Plasmapheresis
IV-136.   In an HIV-infected patient,  Isospora belli infection
is different from C ryptosporidium infection in which of
the following ways?
A. Isospora causes a more fulminant diarrheal syn-
drome leading to rapid dehydration and even deathin the absence of rapid rehydration.B. Isospora infection may cause biliary tract disease,whereas cryptosporidiosis is strictly limited to thelumen of the small and large bowel.
C. Isospora is more likely to infect immunocompetenthosts than Cryptosporidium .
D. Isospora is less challenging to treat and generallyresponds well to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazoletreatment.
E. Isospora occasionally causes large outbreaks amongthe general population.
IV-137.   In a patient with known HIV infection, all of the
following are an AIDS-deﬁning criterion except
A. active pulmonary tuberculosisB. CD4+ lymphocyte count < 200/ µL
C. cryptococcal meningitis
D. cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitisE. disseminated Mycobacterial avium  complex (MAI/
MAC) infection
F. herpes zoster infection involving more than one
dermatome
G. Kaposi’s sarcomaH. Pneumocystis jiroveci  pneumonia
IV-138.   A 27-year-old man presents to your clinic with 2
weeks of sore throat, malaise, myalgias, night sweats, fe-vers, and chills. He visited an urgent care center and was
told that he likely had the ﬂu. He was told that he had a
“negative test for mono.” The patient is homosexual,states that he is in a monogamous relationship and hasunprotected receptive and insertive anal and oral inter-course with one partner. He had several partners prior tohis current partner 4 years ago but none recently. He re-ports a negative HIV-1 test 2 years ago and recalls beingdiagnosed with Chlamydia  infection 4 years ago. He is
otherwise healthy with no medical problems. Y ou wish to
rule out the diagnosis of acute HIV . Which blood test
should you order?
A. CD4+ lymphocyte count
B. HIV enzyme immunoassay (EIA)/Western blot
combination testing
C. HIV resistance panelD. HIV RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)E. HIV RNA by ultrasensitive PCR
IV-139.   A 20-year-old female is 36 weeks pregnant and pre-
sents for her ﬁrst evaluation. She is diagnosed with Chla-
mydia trachomatis  infection of the cervix. Upon delivery,
what complication is her infant most at risk for?
A. Jaundice
B. HydrocephalusC. Hutchinson triadD. ConjunctivitisE. Sensorineural deafnessIV-136.    (Continued) IV-134.    (Continued)
122 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-140.   A 29-year-old man is being initiated on HIV anti-
retroviral therapy (ART) because of a rising viral RNA.
He has no signiﬁcant past medical or psychiatric historyand has never received ART. His viral resistance screeningshows no likely resistance mutations. Which of the fol-lowing is now considered an acceptable ﬁrst-line regimenof ART for patients being newly treated for HIV infectionwho have no viral resistance and no other medical or psy-chiatric problems?
A. Stavudine (d4T), didanosine (ddI), efavirenz (EFV)
B. T enofovir (TDF), emtricitabine (FTC), efavirenz
(EFV)
C. T enofovir (TDF), emtricitabine (FTC), indinavirD. T enofovir (TDF), lopinavir/ritonavir, atazanavirE. Zidovudine (AZT), lamivudine (3TC), abacavir
(ABC)
IV-141.   All of the following clinical ﬁndings are consistent
with the diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum except
A. involvement of the genitalsB. involvement of the soles of the feetC. lack of inﬂammation or necrosis at the site of the rashD. rash associated with an eczematous eruptionE. rash spontaneously resolving over 3–4 months
IV-142.   A 45-year-old woman with known HIV infection
and medical nonadherence to therapy is admitted to thehospital with 2–3 weeks of increasing dyspnea on exer-tion and malaise. Chest radiograph shows bilateral alveo-lar inﬁltrates and induced sputum is positive forPneumocystis jiroveci . Which of the following clinical con-
ditions is an indication for administration of adjunct glu-cocorticoids?
A. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
B. CD4+ lymphocyte count < 100/ µL
C. No clinical improvement 5 days into therapyD. PneumothoraxE. Room air Pa
O2 <70 mmHg
IV-143.   Caspofungin is a ﬁrst-line agent for which of the
following conditions?
A. Candidemia
B. HistoplasmosisC. Invasive aspergillosisD. MucormycosisE. Paracoccidiomycosis
IV-144.   A 19-year-old college student presents to the emer-
gency room with crampy abdominal pain and watery di-arrhea that has worsened over 3 days. He recentlyreturned from a volunteer trip to Mexico. He has no pastmedical history and felt well throughout the trip. Stoolexamination shows small cysts containing four nuclei,and stool antigen immunoassay is positive for Giardia .
Which of the following is an effective treatment regimen?A. AlbendazoleB. ClindamycinC. Giardiasis is self-limited and requires no antibiotic
therapy
D. MetronidazoleE. ParomomycinF. Tinidazole
IV-145.   A 76-year-old woman is brought in to clinic by her
son. She complains of a chronic nonproductive coughand fatigue. Her son adds that she has had low-grade fe-vers, progressive weight loss over months, and “justdoesn’t seem like herself.” A chest CT reveals bronchiecta-sis and small (<5 mm) nodules scattered throughout thelung parenchyma. She had a distant history of treated tu-berculosis. A sputum sample is obtained, as are bloodcultures. Two weeks later, both culture sets grow acid fastbacilli consistent with Mycobacterium avium  complex.
Which of the following is the best treatment option?
A. Bronchodilators and pulmonary toilet
B. Clarithromycin and ethambutolC. Clarithromycin and rifampinD. Moxiﬂoxacin and rifampinE. Pyrazinamide, isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol
IV-146.   Sensitive and speciﬁc serum or urine diagnostic
tests exist for all of the following invasive fungal infec-tions except
A. blastomycosisB. coccidioidomycosisC. cryptococcosisD. histoplasmosis
IV-147.   What is the most common side effect of oral rib-
avirin when used with pegylated interferon for the treat-ment of hepatitis C?
A. Drug-associated lupus
B. Hemolytic anemiaC. HyperthyroidismD. LeukopeniaE. Rash
IV-148.   A previously unvaccinated health care worker in-
curs a needle stick from a patient with known active hep-atitis B infection. What is the appropriate managementfor the health care worker?
A. Hepatitis B immunoglobulins
B. Hepatitis B vaccineC. Hepatitis B vaccine plus hepatitis B immunoglobulinsD. Hepatitis B vaccine plus lamivudineE. Lamivudine plus tenofovir
IV-149.   Which of the following is not a common feature of
severe Plasmodium falciparum  malaria?IV-144.    (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 123
A. Acute tubular necrosis
B. Hematocrit <15%C. Hepatic necrosisD. HypoglycemiaE. Obtundation
IV-150.   A 55-year-old male is admitted to the hospital with
aspiration pneumonia. Over the past 8 months he hashad a relentless neurologic decline characterized by de-mentia with severe memory loss and decline in intellec-tual function. These symptoms were preceded by 2–3months of labile mood, weight loss, and headache. Cur-rently he is awake but unable to answer questions. Neuro-logic examination is notable for normal cranial nervesand sensation. He has marked myoclonus provoked bystartle or bright lights, but it also occurs spontaneouslyduring sleep. Prior evaluation revealed normal serumchemistries, negative serologic tests for syphilis, and nor-mal cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) studies. Head CT scan isnormal. The infectious agent that caused his neurologicsyndrome is most likely a
A. DNA virus
B. fungusC. protein-lacking nucleic acidD. protozoanE. RNA virus
IV-151.   A previously healthy 19-year-old man presents
with several days of headache, cough with scant sputum,and fever of 38.6°C. On examination, pharyngeal ery-thema is noted and lung ﬁelds are clear. Chest radiographreveals focal bronchopneumonia in the lower lobes. His
hematocrit is 24.7%, down from a baseline measure of46%. The only other laboratory abnormality is an indi-rect bilirubin of 3.4. A peripheral smear reveals no abnor-malities. A cold agglutinin titer is measured at 1:64. What
is the most likely infectious agent?
A. Coxiella burnetii
B. Legionella pneumophila
C. Methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus
D. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
E. Streptococcus pneumoniae
IV-152.   A 79-year-old Filipino-American man with diabe-
tes mellitus, coronary artery disease, and emphysema de-
velops the acute onset of low back pain and night sweats.T en days prior, he underwent a prolonged lithotripsy pro-cedure for septic ureteral stones. He was treated for a pos-itive PPD 23 years ago. He moved to the United States 20
years ago and was a rice farmer in the Philippines prior tomoving. Examination reveals tenderness over the lumbarspine. He has 5/5 strength in his lower extremities. MRI
shows ﬁndings consistent with osteomyelitis of L3 andL4, with narrowing of the disc space and a small contigu-ous epidural abscess that is not compressing his spinalcord. A needle culture of the epidural abscess drawn prior
to administration of antibiotics will most likely revealwhich of the following?
A. Brucella melitensis
B. Escherichia coli
C. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
D. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Polymicrobial content with gram-positive cocci in
chains, enteric gram-negative rods, and anaerobic
pleomorphic forms
IV-153.   A 64-year-old man in Wisconsin develops a high
fever and malaise over 2 days. He has spent his weekendsover the past month chopping wood in his backyard. Ini-tial laboratory examination reveals a neutrophil count of1000/µL, platelet count of 84,000/ µL, AST of 140 U/L,
and ALT of 183 U/L. A peripheral blood smear reveals
prominent morulae in neutrophils. What is the most
likely diagnosis?
A. Human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis
B. Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis 
C. Lyme diseaseD. Rocky Mountain spotted feverE. Systemic lupus erythematosus
IV-154.   A 26-year-old asthmatic continues to have coughing
ﬁts and dyspnea despite numerous steroid tapers and fre-quent use of albuterol over the past few months. Persistentinﬁltrates are seen on chest roentgenogram. A pulmonaryconsultation suggests an evaluation for allergic bronchopul-monary aspergillosis. What is the diagnostic test of choice?
A. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) with fungal culture
B. Galactomannan enzyme immunoassay (EIA)C. High-resolution CTD. Pulmonary function testsE. Serum IgE level
IV-155.   A patient who has undergone prosthetic valve sur-
gery 6 weeks ago is readmitted with signs and symptomsconsistent with infective endocarditis. Which of the fol-lowing is the most likely etiologic organism?
A. Candida albicans
B. Coagulase-negative staphylococci
C. Enterococcus
D. Escherichia coli
E. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
IV-156.   A 28-year-old man is diagnosed with HIV infec-
tion during a clinic visit. He has no symptoms of oppor-tunistic infection. His CD4+ lymphocyte count is 150/µL. All of the following are approved regimens for pri-
mary prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jiroveci  infection
except
A. aerosolized pentamidine, 300 mg monthlyIV-152.    (Continued) IV-149.    (Continued)
124 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
B. atovaquone, 1500 mg PO daily
C. clindamycin, 900 mg PO q8h, plus primaquine, 30
mg PO daily
D. dapsone, 100 mg PO dailyE. trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, 1 single-strength
tablet PO daily
IV-157.   During the late 1990s, there was a resurgence of all
of the following bacterial sexually transmitted infections(STIs) among homosexual men except
A. chlamydiaB. gonorrheaC. lymphogranuloma venereumD. syphilisE. all of the above had a resurgence
IV-158.   A 47-year-old woman with known HIV/AIDS
(CD4+ lymphocyte = 106/ µL and viral load = 35,000/
mL) presents with painful growths on the side of hertongue (Figure IV-158, Color Atlas). What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Aphthous ulcers
B. Hairy leukoplakiaC. Herpes stomatitisD. Oral candidiasisE. Oral Kaposi’s sarcoma
IV-159.   A 45-year-old patient with HIV/AIDS presents to
the emergency department. He complains of a rash thathas been slowly spreading up his right arm and is now ev-ident on his chest and back. The rash consists of smallnodules that have a reddish-blue appearance. Some ofthem are ulcerated, but there is minimal ﬂuctuance ordrainage. He is unsure when these began. He notes noforeign travel or unusual exposures. He is homeless andunemployed, but occasionally gets work as a day laborerdoing landscaping and digging. A culture of a skin lesion
grows a Mycobacterium  in 5 days. Which of the following
is the most likely organism?
A. M.abscessus
B. M.avium
C. M.kansasii
D. M.marinum
E. M.ulcerans
IV-160.   A 25-year-old male is seen in the emergency de-
partment for symptoms of fevers and abdominal swell-
ing, early satiety, and weight loss. His symptoms beganabruptly 2 weeks ago. He was previously healthy and istaking no medications. He denies illicit drug use andrecently immigrated to the United States from Bang-ladesh. On physical examination, temperature is 39.0°C(102.2°F) and pulse is 120, with normal blood pressureand respiratory rate. The remainder of the exam is no-table for cachexia and a distended abdomen with amassively enlarged spleen. The spleen is tender andsoft. The liver is not palpable. Mild peripheral adenop-athy is present. Which of the following statements iscorrect regarding this patient with presumed kala azarleishmaniasis?
A. He probably has normal cell counts on peripheral
blood smear.
B. Leishmania donovani  is not endemic in Bangladesh.
C. Leishmania-speciﬁc cell-mediated immunity proba-
bly is present.
D. Splenic aspiration offers the highest diagnostic
yield.
E. Treatment can be delayed until the diagnosis is con-
ﬁrmed.
IV-161.   All of the following are examples of an indication
for checking an HIV-resistance genotype except
A. A 23-year-old man presents to the clinic with a new
diagnosis of HIV infection.
B. A 34-year-old man with HIV-1 infection was started
on antiretroviral therapy (ART) [tenofovir (TDF),
emtricitabine (FTC), efavirenz (EFV)] 1 month ago.At that time his CD4+ lymphocyte count was 213/µL and HIV-1 viral load was 65,000 (4.8 log). On re-check 1 month later, his HIV-1 viral load is 37,000(4.6 log). He states that he is taking his medicine100% of the time.
C. A 42-year-old man with HIV/AIDS who was started
on ART [TDF, FTC, and ritonavir-boosted atazana-vir (ATV/r)] 1 year ago was lost to follow-up. Origi-nally his HIV-1 viral load was 197,000 (5.3 log) andCD4+ lymphocyte count was 11/ µL. He was 100%
compliant with his pills until he ran out of medi-cines 2 months ago. Viral load on recheck is 184,000(log 5.3) with CD4+ lymphocyte count of 138/ µL.
D. A 52-year-old woman who has had full viral sup-
pression (HIV-1 viral load <30/mL) and 100% med-ical compliance on ART [zidovudine (AZT),lamivudine (3TC), EFV] for 2 years has relapsed onIV heroin over the past 3 months. She states that shecontinued to take her ART with “a few missed doseshere and there” . Repeat viral load is 3800/mL andCD4+ lymphocyte count is stable at 413/ µL.
IV-162.   A 41-year-old man with hepatitis C–associated as-
cites presents with acute abdominal pain. Physical exami-nation is notable for temperature of 38.3°C, heart rate of115 beats per minute, blood pressure of 88/48 mmHg,respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and oxygen sat-uration of 99% on room air. The patient is in moderatediscomfort and is lying still. He is alert and oriented.Lungs are clear. Cardiac examination is unremarkable.His abdomen is diffusely tender with distant bowelsounds, mild guarding, and no rebound tenderness. Lab-oratory studies reveal a leukocyte count of 11,630/ µLIV-160. (Continued) IV-156. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 125
with 94% neutrophils, hematocrit of 29%, and platelet
count of 24,000/ µL. Paracentesis reveals 658 PMNs/ µL,
total protein 1.2 g/dL, glucose 24 mg/dL, and gram stainshowing gram-negative rods, gram-positive cocci inchains, gram-positive rods, and yeast forms. All of the fol-lowing are indicated except
A. abdominal radiograph
B. broad-spectrum antibioticsC. drotrecogin alfaD. intravenous ﬂuidE. surgical consultation
IV-163.   Patients with which of the following have the low-
est risk of invasive pulmonary Aspergillus  infection?
A. Allogeneic stem cell transplant with graft-vs-host
disease
B. HIV infectionC. Long-standing high-dose glucocorticoidsD. Post-solid organ transplant with multiple episodes
of rejection
E. Relapsed/uncontrolled leukemia
IV-164.   All the following patient characteristics are in-
cluded in the calculation of the Pneumonia Patient Out-comes Research T eam (PORT) score that is used in theevaluation of patients with community-acquired pneu-monia except
A. ageB. coexisting illnessC. laboratory ﬁndingsD. radiographic ﬁndingsE. smoking history
IV-165.   Rifampin lowers serum levels of all of the following
medicines except
A. amiodaroneB. anticonvulsantsC. oyclosporineD. hormonal contraceptivesE. protease inhibitorsF. warfarin
IV-166.   Which single clinical feature has the most speciﬁc-
ity in differentiating Pseudomonas aeruginosa  sepsis from
other causes of severe sepsis in a hospitalized patient?
A. Ecthyma gangrenosum
B. Hospitalization for severe burnC. Profound bandemiaD. Recent antibiotic exposureE. Recent mechanical ventilation for >14 days
IV-167.   Which of the following statements regarding vari-
cella-zoster infection after hematopoietic stem cell trans-plant is true?A. Acyclovir prophylaxis is not warranted for patients
with positive varicella-zoster virus serologies pre-transplant as the rate of zoster reactivation is lowfollowing transplantation.
B. Herpes zoster resistance is a common problem, and a
change from acyclovir to foscarnet is often required.
C. Multidermatomal and disseminated zoster can oc-
cur in transplant patients who do not receive appro-priate antiviral therapy.
D. Zoster occurs more commonly following autolo-
gous transplant of stem cells than allogeneic trans-plant of stem cells.
E. Zoster occurs most frequently during the ﬁrst
month after transplant.
IV-168.   All of the following factors inﬂuence the likelihood
of transmitting active tuberculosis except
A. duration of contact with an infected personB. environment in which contact occursC. presence of extrapulmonary tuberculosisD. presence of laryngeal tuberculosisE. probability of contact with an infectious person
IV-169.   Which of the following individuals with a known
history of prior latent tuberculosis infection (withouttherapy) has the greatest likelihood of developing reacti-vation tuberculosis?
A. A 28-year-old woman with anorexia nervosa, a body
mass index of 16 kg/m
2, and a serum albumin of 2.3
g/dL
B. A 36-year-old intravenous drug user who does not
have HIV but is homeless
C. A 42-year-old man who is HIV-positive with a CD4
count of 350/ µL on highly active antiretroviral therapy
D. A 68-year-old man who worked as a stone mason
for many years and has silicosis
E. A 73-year-old man who was infected while stationed
in Korea in 1958
IV-170.    A 42-year-old Nigerian man comes to the emer-
gency room because of fevers, fatigue, weight loss, and
cough for 3 weeks. He complains of fevers and a 4.5-kgweight loss. He describes his sputum as yellow in color. Ithas rarely been blood streaked. He emigrated to theUnited States 1 year ago and is an undocumented alien.He has never been treated for tuberculosis, has never hada puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD) skin test placed, anddoes not recall receiving BCG vaccination. He denies HIVrisk factors. He is married and reports no ill contacts. Hesmokes a pack of cigarettes daily and drinks a pint ofvodka on a daily basis. On physical examination, he ap-pears chronically ill with temporal wasting. His bodymass index is 21 kg/m
2. Vital signs are: blood pressure
122/68 mmHg, heart rate 89 beats/min, respiratory rate22 breaths/min, Sa
O2 95% on room air, and temperatureIV-167. (Continued) IV-162. (Continued)
126 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
37.9°C. There are amphoric breath sounds posteriorly in
the right upper lung ﬁeld with a few scattered crackles inthis area. No clubbing is present. The examination is oth-erwise unremarkable. A portion of the CT scan of hislungs is shown.
A stain for acid-fast bacilli is negative. What is the most ap-
propriate approach to the ongoing care of this patient?
A. Admit the patient on airborne isolation until three
expectorated sputums show no evidence of acid-fast
bacilli.
B. Admit the patient without isolation as he is unlikely
to be infectious with a negative acid-fast smear.
C. Perform a biopsy of the lesion and consult oncology.D. Place a PPD test on his forearm and have him return
for evaluation in 3 days.
E. Start a 6-week course of antibiotic treatment for
anaerobic bacterial abscess.
IV-171.   A 50-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for
active pulmonary tuberculosis with a positive sputumacid-fast bacilli smear. He is HIV positive with a CD4count of 85/µL and is not on highly active antiretroviraltherapy. In addition to pulmonary disease, he is found to
have disease in the L4 vertebral body. What is the mostappropriate initial therapy?
A. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide
B. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazina-
mide; initiate antiretroviral therapy
C. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and
streptomycin
D. Isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutolE. Withhold therapy until sensitivities are available.
IV-172.   All of the following individuals receiving tubercu-
lin skin puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD) reactionsshould be treated for latent tuberculosis except
A. A 23-year-old injection drug user who is HIV nega-
tive has a 12-mm PPD reaction.B. A 38-year-old fourth grade teacher has a 7-mm PPD
reaction and no known exposures to active tubercu-losis. She has never been tested with a PPD previ-ously.
C. A 43-year-old individual in the Peace Corps work-
ing in Sub-Saharan Africa has a 10-mm PPD reac-tion. 18 months ago, the PPD reaction was 3 mm.
D. A 55-year-old man who is HIV positive has a nega-
tive PPD. His partner was recently diagnosed with
cavitary tuberculosis.
E. A 72-year-old man who is receiving chemotherapy for
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma has a 16-mm PPD reaction.
IV-173.   A 34-year-old man seeks the advice of his primary
care physician because of an asymptomatic rash on hischest. There are coalescing light brown to salmon-colored
macules present on the chest. A scraping of the lesions is
viewed after a wet preparation with 10% potassium hy-droxide solution. There are both hyphal and spore forms
present, giving the slide an appearance of “spaghetti andmeatballs.” In addition, the lesions ﬂuoresce to a yellow-green appearance under a Wood’s lamp. Tinea versicolor
is diagnosed. Which of the following microorganisms isresponsible for this skin infection?
A. Fusarium solani
B. Malassezia furfur
C. Sporothrix schenkii
D. Trichophyton rubrum
IV-174.   A 68-year-old woman seeks evaluation for an ul-
cerative lesion on her right hand. She reports the area on
the back of her right hand was initially red and not pain-
ful. There appeared to be a puncture wound in the centerof the area, and she thought she had a simple scratch ac-quired while gardening. Over the next several days, the le-sion became verrucous and ulcerated. Now, the patienthas noticed several nodular areas along the arm, one ofwhich ulcerated and began draining a serous ﬂuid today.She is also noted to have an enlarged and tender epitro-chlear lymph node on the right arm. A biopsy of the edgeof the lesion shows ovoid and cigar-shaped yeasts.Sporotrichosis is diagnosed. What is the most appropriatetherapy for this patient?
A. Amphotericin B intravenously
B. Caspofungin intravenously
C. Clotrimazole topicallyD. Itraconazole orallyE. Selenium sulﬁde topically
IV-175.    A 44-year-old man presents to the emergency room
for evaluation of a severe sore throat. His symptoms began
this morning with mild irritation on swallowing and havegotten progressively severe over the course of 12 h. He has
been experiencing a fever to as high as 39°C at home and alsoreports progressive shortness of breath. He denies antecedentFIGURE IV-170
IV-172. (Continued) IV-170. (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 127
rhinorrhea or tooth or jaw pain. He has had no ill contacts.
On physical examination, the patient appears ﬂushed and inrespiratory distress with use of accessory muscles of respira-tion. Inspiratory stridor is present. He is sitting leaning for-ward and is drooling with his neck extended. His vital signsare as follows: temperature 39.5°C, blood pressure 116/60mmHg, heart rate 118 beats/min, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, Sa
O2 95% on room air. Examination of his oropharynx
shows erythema of the posterior oropharynx without exu-dates or tonsillar enlargement. The uvula is midline. There isno sinus tenderness and no cervical lymphadenopathy. Hislung ﬁelds are clear to auscultation, and cardiovascular ex-amination reveals a regular tachycardia with a II/VI systolicejection murmur heard at the upper right sternal border. Ab-dominal, extremity, and neurologic examinations are nor-mal. Laboratory studies reveal a white blood cell count of17,000 µL  with a differential of 87% neutrophil, 8% band
forms, 4% lymphocytes, and 1% monocytes. Hemoglobin is13.4 g/dL with a hematocrit of 44.2%. An arterial blood gason room air has a pH of 7.32, a Pa
CO2 of 48 mmHg, and Pa O2
of 92 mmHg. A lateral neck ﬁlm shows an edematous epi-glottis. What is the next most appropriate step in evaluationand treatment of this individual?
A. Ampicillin, 500 mg IV q6h
B. Ceftriaxone, 1 g IV q24hC. Endotracheal intubation and ampicillin, 500 mg IV q6hD. Endotracheal intubation, ceftriaxone, 1 g IV q24h,
and clindamycin, 600 mg IV q6h
E. Laryngoscopy and close observation
IV-176.   A 45-year-old man from western Kentucky presents
to the emergency room in September complaining of fe-vers, headaches, and muscle pains. He recently had been ona camping trip with several friends during which theyhunted for their food, including ﬁsh, squirrels, and rabbits.He did not recall any tick bites during the trip, but does re-call having several mosquito bites. For the past week, hehas had an ulceration on his right hand with redness andpain surrounding it. He also has noticed some pain andswelling near his right elbow. None of the friends hecamped with have been similarly ill. His vital signs are:blood pressure 106/65 mmHg, heart rate 116 beats/min,respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, and temperature 38.7°C.His oxygen saturation is 93% on room air. He appears
mildly tachypneic and ﬂushed. His conjunctiva are not in-jected and his mucous membranes are dry. The chest ex-amination reveals crackles in the right mid-lung ﬁeld andleft base. His heart rate is tachycardic but regular. There is aII/VI systolic ejection murmur heard best at the lower leftsternal border. His abdominal examination is unremark-
able. On the right hand, there is an erythematous ulcerwith a punched-out center covered by a black eschar. Hehas no cervical lymphadenopathy, but there are markedlyenlarged and tender lymph nodes in the right axillae andepitrochlear regions. The epitrochlear node has some ﬂuc-tuance with palpation. A chest x-ray shows ﬂuffy bilateralalveolar inﬁltrates. Over the ﬁrst 12 h of his hospitalization,the patient becomes progressively hypotensive and hy-poxic, requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation.What is the most appropriate therapy for this patient?
A. Ampicillin, 2 g IV q6h
B. Ceftriaxone, 1 g IV dailyC. Ciproﬂoxacin, 400 mg IV twice dailyD. Doxycycline, 100 mg IV twice dailyE. Gentamicin, 5 mg/kg twice daily
IV-177.   A 24-year-old man seeks evaluation for painless
penile ulcerations. He noted the ﬁrst lesion about 2 weeksago, and since that time, two adjacent areas have also de-veloped ulceration. He states that there has been blood
staining his underwear from slight oozing of the ulcers.He has no past medical history and takes no medication.He returned 5 weeks ago from a vacation in Brazil wherehe did have unprotected sexual intercourse with a localwoman. He denies other high-risk sexual behaviors andhas never had sex with prostitutes. He was last tested forHIV 2 years ago. He has never had a chlamydial or gono-coccal infection. On examination, there are three well-deﬁned red, friable lesions measuring 5 mm or less on thepenile shaft. They bleed easily with any manipulation.There is no pain with palpation. There is shotty inguinallymphadenopathy. On biopsy of one lesion, there is a
prominent intracytoplasmic inclusion of bipolar organ-isms in an enlarged mononuclear cell. Additionally, thereis epithelial cell proliferation with an increased numberof plasma cells and few neutrophils. A rapid plasma rea-
gin test is negative. Cultures grow no organisms. What is
the most likely causative organism?
A. Calymmatobacterium granulomatis  (donovanosis)
B. Chlamydia trachomatis  (lymphogranuloma venereum)
C. Haemophilus ducreyi  (chancroid)
D. Leishmania amazonensis  (cutaneous leishmaniasis)
E. Treponema pallidum  (secondary syphilis)
IV-178.   A 75-year-old patient presents with fevers and
wasting. He describes fatigue and malaise over the past
several months and is concerned that he has been losingweight. On examination, he is noted to have a low-gradefever and a soft diastolic heart murmur is appreciated.Laboratory tests reveal a normocytic, normochromicanemia. Three separate blood cultures grow Cardiobacte-
rium hominis . Which of the following statements is true
about this patient’s clinical condition?
A. Antibiotics are not likely to improve his condition.
B. Echocardiogram will likely be normal.C. He has a form of endocarditis with a high risk of
emboli.
D. He will likely need surgery.E. The positive blood cultures are likely a skin contam-
inant.IV-176.   (Continued) IV-175.   (Continued)
128 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS
IV-179.   A 38-year-old woman with frequent hospital ad-
missions related to alcoholism comes to the emergency
room after being bitten by a dog. There are open woundson her arms and right hand that are purulent and havenecrotic borders. She is hypotensive and is admitted tothe intensive care unit. She is found to have disseminatedintravascular coagulation and soon develops multiorganfailure. Which of the following is the most likely organ-ism to have caused her rapid decline?
A. Aeromonas  spp.
B. Capnocytophaga spp.
C. Eikenella spp.
D. Haemophilus spp.
E. Staphylococcus spp.
IV-180.   A 39-year-old healthy man plans to travel to Ma-
laysia and comes to clinic for appropriate vaccinations.
He cannot recall which vaccines he has had in the past,but reports having had “all the usual ones” in childhood.Which of the following represents the most common vac-cine-preventable infection in travelers?
A. Inﬂuenza
B. MeaslesC. RabiesD. T etanusE. Y ellow fever
IV-181.   A 19-year-old man plans on traveling through
Central America by bus. He comes to clinic interested intravel advice and any vaccinations he may need. He hasno medical history and takes no medicines. In addition toDEET and mosquito netting, which of the following rec-ommendations would be important for prophylaxisagainst malaria?
A. Atovaquone
B. ChloroquineC. DoxycyclineD. MeﬂoquineE. Primaquine
IV-182.   Which of the following is the most common source
of fever in travelers returning from Southeast Asia?
A. Dengue fever
B. MalariaC. MononucleosisD. SalmonellaE. Y ellow fever
IV-183.    A 54-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room complaining of pain and redness of her left face andcheek. The area of redness began abruptly yesterday. Atthat time, the area was about 5 mm
2 near the nasolabial
fold. There was rapid progression of the redness to an areathat is now about 5 cm
2. In addition, she is complaining
of intense pain in this area. On examination, there is awell-demarcated 5 cm2 area of erythema along her left na-
solabial fold. The borders are raised and indurated. Theentire area is very tender to touch. Over the next 24 h, theaffected area begins to develop a ﬂaccid bullae. What isthe most appropriate treatment for this patient?
A. Acyclovir
B. ClindamycinC. Clindamycin and penicillinD. PenicillinE. Trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole
IV-184.   A 68-year-old man is brought to the emergency room
with altered mental status, fever, and leg pain. His wife re-ports that he ﬁrst complained of pain in his leg yesterday,and there was some slight redness in this area. Over the
night, he developed a fever to as high as 39.8°C and becameobtunded this morning. At that point, his family broughthim to the emergency room. Upon arrival, he is unrespon-sive to voice and withdraws to pain. The vital signs are:blood pressure 88/40 mmHg, heart rate 126 beats/min, res-piratory rate 28 breaths/min, temperature 39.3°C, and Sa
O2
95% on room air. Examination of the right leg shows dif-
fuse swelling with brawny edema. The patient grimaces inpain when the area is touched. There are several bullae ﬁlledwith dark blue to purple ﬂuid. Laboratory studies show: pH
7.22, Pa
CO2 28 mmHg, Pa O2 93 mmHg. The creatinine is 3.2
mg/dL. White blood cell count is elevated at 22,660/ µL with
a differential of 70% polymorphonuclear cells, 28% bandforms, and 2% lymphocytes. A bulla is aspirated and theGram stain shows gram-positive cocci in chains. What is the
most appropriate therapy for this patient?
A. Ampicillin, clindamycin, and gentamicin
B. Clindamycin and penicillinC. Clindamycin, penicillin, and surgical debridementD. Penicillin and surgical debridementE. Vancomycin, penicillin, and surgical debridement
IV-185.   In the urgent care clinic, you are evaluating a 47-
year-old woman with poorly controlled diabetes who hasa chief complaint of “sinusitis.” She does not have a his-tory of atopy. She ﬁrst noticed a headache 2 days ago andnow feels very congested in her upper nasal passages. She
has hyperesthesia over her nasal bridge as well and is in-quiring about antibiotics to treat her infection. She has abloody nasal discharge with occasional black specks. Onexamination, the sinuses are full and tender. She has atemperature of 38.3°C. Oral examination shows a black
eschar on the roof of her mouth surrounded by discol-ored hyperemic areas on the palate. What is the most ap-propriate intervention at this time?
A. Ciproﬂoxacin and quarantine for possible anthrax
B. ENT consultation if no improvement with oral anti-
biotics
C. Immediate biopsy of the involved areas and lipid
amphotericinIV-183.   (Continued)
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — QUESTIONS 129
D. Immediate biopsy of the lesion and voriconazole
E. Intranasal decongestants and close follow-up
IV-186.   A 63-year-old man from Mississippi comes to your
ofﬁce for evaluation of a chronic sore on his thigh. He has
an open sore on his anterior thigh that has been drainingpurulent material for many months. The thigh is non-tender but is warm to touch. The material is purulent and
foul-smelling. He has been given multiple antibioticcourses and recently ﬁnished a course of itraconazolewithout relief of his symptoms. He has an intact neu-rovascular examination of his lower extremities. His
erythrocyte sedimentation rate is 64, white blood cellcount is 15,000/ µL and hemoglobin is 8 mg/dL. A plain
radiograph of the affected thigh shows a periosteal reac-tion of the femur with osteopenia. There is suggestion ofa sinus tract between the femur and the skin. A Gram
stain of the pus shows broad-based budding yeast andyou make a presumptive diagnosis of blastomyces osteo-myelitis. What is the treatment of choice for this patient?
A. Amphotericin B
B. CaspofunginC. ItraconazoleD. MoxiﬂoxacinE. VoriconazoleIV-186.   (Continued) IV-185.   (Continued)
130IV . INFECTIOUS DISEASES
ANSWERS
IV-1. The answer is B.   (Chap. 115)   Cat bites are the most likely animal bites to lead to cellu-
litis due to deep inoculation and the frequent presence of Pasteurella multicoda . In the
immunocompetent host, only cat bites warrant empirical antibiotics. Often the ﬁrst dose
is given parenterally. Ampicillin/sulbactam followed by oral amoxicillin/clavulanate is ef-fective empirical therapy for cat bites. However, in the asplenic patient, a dog bite can
lead to rapid overwhelming sepsis as a result of Capnocytophaga canimorsus  bacteremia.
These patients should be followed closely and given third-generation cephalosporinsearly in the course of infection. Empirical therapy should also be considered for dog bites
in the elderly, for deep bites, and for bites on the hand.
IV-2. The answer is A.   (Chap. 153)   This patient has bacillary angiomatosis due to cutaneous
infection with Bartonella quintana  or B. henselae. Kittens are the likely source of the in-
fection in this case. Bacillary angiomatosis occurs in HIV-infected patients with CD4+ Tcell counts <100/ µL. The cutaneous lesions of bacillary angiomatosis are typically pain-
less cutaneous lesions but may appear as subcutaneous nodules, ulcerated plaques, orverrucous growths. They may be single or multiple. The differential diagnosis includesKaposi’s sarcoma, pyogenic granuloma, and tumors. Biopsy ﬁndings are as described inthis case, and the diagnosis is best made with histology. Treatment is with azithromycinor doxycycline. Oxacillin or vancomycin is the treatment for staphylococcal or strepto-coccal skin infections.
IV-3. The answer is A.   (Chap. 153)   This patient has culture-negative endocarditis, a rare en-
tity deﬁned as clinical evidence of infectious endocarditis in the absence of positive bloodcultures. In this case, evidence for subacute bacterial endocarditis includes valvular re-gurgitation, an aortic valve vegetation, and embolic phenomena on the extremities,spleen, and kidneys. A common reason for negative blood cultures is prior antibiotics. In
the absence of this, the two most common pathogens (both of which are technically difﬁ-cult to isolate in blood culture bottles) are Q fever, or Coxiella burnetii  (typically associ-
ated with close contact with livestock), and Bartonella . In this case, the patient’s
homelessness and body louse infestation are clues for Bartonella quintana  infection. Di-
agnosis is made by blood culture about 25% of the time. Otherwise, direct PCR of valvu-lar tissue, if available, or acute and convalescent serologies are diagnostic options.Empirical therapy for culture-negative endocarditis usually includes ceftriaxone and gen-tamicin, with or without doxycycline. For conﬁrmed Bartonella  endocarditis, optimal
therapy is gentamicin plus doxycycline. EBV and HIV do not cause endocarditis. A pe-
ripheral blood smear would not be diagnostic.
IV-4. The answer is D.   (Chap. 182)   Dermatologic problems occur in >90% of patients with
HIV infection. Seborrheic dermatitis is perhaps the most common rash in HIV patients,affecting up to 50% of patients. The prevalence increases with falling CD4+ T cell count.The rash involves the scalp and the face, appearing as described in the question. Therapyis standard topical treatment, although often a topical antifungal is added because of con-comitant infection with Pityrosporum . Herpes zoster reactivation is painful and dermato-
mal, with progression of papules to vesicles to small pustules and then crusting.Molluscum contagiosum typically appears as one or many small pearly umbilicatedasymptomatic papules occurring anywhere on the body. They can be a signiﬁcant cos-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 131
metic issue in patients with AIDS. Psoriasis is not more common in patients with HIV in-
fection but may be more severe and generalized. It would be uncommon to involve the
face only.
IV-5. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 115 and 203)   Any returning traveler to a region where Plas-
modium falciparum  is endemic who develops a fever warrants emergent evaluation for
the most common and dangerous infection in the returning traveler: malaria.  P. falci-
parum is the potentially fatal form of malaria that can lead to overwhelming sepsis, renalfailure, and cerebral edema; it is also the most common form of malaria in Africa. Thispatient should be referred to the emergency department for a thick and thin smear. If asmear can’t be performed and interpreted in an expeditious fashion, then empiricaldoxycycline and quinine should be started. Symptoms of malaria are nonspeciﬁc but in-clude fever, headache, abdominal pain, jaundice, myalgias, and mental status change.
IV-6. The answer is C.   (Chap. 124)   This patient has a classic presentation and microscopic
examination of bacterial vaginosis. Bacterial vaginosis, which is linked with HIV acquisi-tion, herpes simplex virus (HSV) 2 shedding and acquisition, gonorrhea and Chlamydia
acquisition, increased risk of preterm delivery, and subacute pelvic inﬂammatory disease,is unfortunately very difﬁcult to treat. With the best available regimens, women recur at arate of about 25%. Metronidazole, either as an oral formulation or vaginal gel, is recom-
mended for at least 7 days for primary infection and 10–14 days for recurrence. Intravag-inal clindamycin for this duration is also an option but has been associated with moreanaerobic drug resistance. Treatment of male partners with metronidazole does not pre-vent recurrence of bacterial vaginosis. Metronidazole, 2g PO × 1, is standard treatment
forTrichomonas but is too short a duration for bacterial vaginosis .Fluconazole is used for
vaginal candidiasis. Douching has no proven role in bacterial vaginosis infection. Acyclo-vir is the recommended treatment for HSV-2 genital infection.
IV-7. The answer is B.   (Chap. 203)   Artemisinin-containing regimens are now recommended
by the World Health Organization as ﬁrst-line agents for P.falciparum  malaria. In severe
P.falciparum  malaria, IV artesunate reduced mortality by 35% compared to IV quinine.
Artemether and artemotil are given IM and are not as effective as artesunate. Althoughsafer and more effective than quinine, artesunate is not available in the United States. Inthe United States, quinidine or quinine is used as a necessary second choice. Intravenousquinine is as effective as and safer than IV quinidine. Quinine causes fewer arrhythmiasand hypotension with infusion than quinidine, but it is often not available in U.S. hospi-tal pharmacies. Chloroquine is only effective for P. v ivax  and P.ovale  infection and P. fal-
ciparum  infection in certain pockets of the Middle East and Caribbean where resistance
has not yet developed. Meﬂoquine comes only as an oral formulation. It is most com-
monly employed as a prophylactic agent but is also used for treatment of multidrug-resistant malaria.
IV-8. The answer is F .   (Chap. 124)   HIV is the leading cause of death in some developing
countries. Efforts to decrease transmission include screening and treatment of sexuallyassociated infections. All of the listed conditions have been linked with higher acquisitionof HIV , based on epidemiologic studies and high biologic plausibility. Up to 50% ofwomen of reproductive age in developing countries have bacterial vaginosis. All of thebacterial infections are curable, and treatment can decrease the frequency of genital her-pes recurrences. This highlights an additional reason that primary care doctors should
screen for each of these infections in female patients with detailed historic questions,genitourinary and rectal examinations, and evidence-based routine screening for theseinfections based on age and risk category.
IV-9. The answer is B.   (Chap. 184)   Enteroviruses are responsible for up to 90% of aseptic
meningitis in which an etiologic agent can be identiﬁed. Symptoms are typically more se-vere in adults than children. Illness is more frequent in the summer and fall in temperateclimates, whereas other causes of viral meningitis are more common in winter andspring. CSF analysis always shows an elevated (though usually <1000 cells/ µL) white
132 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
blood cell count. Early, there may be a neutrophil predominance; however, this typically
shifts toward lymphocyte predominance by 24 h. CSF glucose and protein are usuallynormal, though the latter can sometimes be elevated. The illness is typically self-limitingand prognosis is excellent.
IV-10. The answer is B.   (Chap. 141)   Despite antibiotic treatment, pneumonia from all causes
remains a major source of mortality in the United States. Mortality from Legionella  pneu-
monia varies from 0–11% in treated immunocompetent patients to ~30% if not treatedeffectively. Because Legionella  is an intracellular pathogen, antibiotics that reach intracel-
lular MICs are most likely to be effective. Newer macrolides and quinolones are antibi-otics of choice and are effective as monotherapy. Doxycycline and tigecycline are active in
vitro. Anecdotal reports have described successes and failures with trimethoprim/sulfa-methoxazole and clindamycin. Aztreonam, most β-lactams, and cephalosporins cannot
be considered effective therapy for Legionella  pneumonia. For severe cases, rifampin may
be added to azithromycin or a ﬂuoroquinolone initially.
IV-11. The answer is C.   (Chap. 182)   There is unfortunately a worsening HIV-1 epidemic in
the Southeastern United States among heterosexual women, with an alarmingly increas-ing incidence in minority adolescent females. Despite fairly widespread knowledgeamong the U.S. populace about how HIV is spread, there has been a gradual increase inprevalence over the past decade in men who sleep with men as well as those who acquireHIV via high-risk heterosexual transmission. This last group is notable for major in-creases among long-term female partners of men who engage in, or previously engagedin, high-risk behavior. Men who sleep with men still account for the largest proportion ofHIV cases in this country. The proportion of cases due to needle-sharing behaviors is still
signiﬁcant but is decreasing.
IV-12. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 201 and 212)   This patient has Katayama fever caused by in-
fection with Schistosoma mansoni.  Approximately 4–8 weeks after exposure the parasite
migrates through the portal and pulmonary circulations. This phase of the illness may beasymptomatic but in some cases evokes a hypersensitivity response and a serum sick-ness–type illness. Eosinophilia is usual. Since there is not a large enteric burden of para-sites during this phase of the illness, stool studies may not be positive and serology maybe helpful, particularly in patients from nonendemic areas. Praziquantel is the treatmentof choice because Katayama fever may progress to include neurologic complications.Chloroquine is used for treatment of malaria; mebendazole for ascariasis, hookworm,trichinosis, and visceral larval migrans; metronidazole for amebiasis, giardiasis, andtrichomoniasis; and thiabendazole for strongyloides.
IV-13. The answer is E.   (Chap. 116)   Live attenuated viruses are generally contraindicated as
vaccines for immunocompromised hosts for fear of vaccine-induced disease. The mostcited example of this is smallpox vaccine resulting in disseminated vaccinia infection.However, yellow fever vaccine is another example of a live virus vaccine. The other exam-ples listed in this example are inactivated organisms (rabies, IM typhoid) or polysaccha-ride (meningococcal) and are therefore noninfectious. Oral typhoid vaccine is a live
attenuated strain, so the IM form is likely preferable in this host. Malaria prophylaxiscurrently involves chemoprophylaxis rather than vaccination. While safe from an infec-tious standpoint, potential interactions with cyclosporine should be monitored.
IV-14. The answer is D.   (Chap. 208)   Trichomoniasis is transmitted via sexual contact with an
infected partner. Many men are asymptomatic but may have symptoms of urethritis, epi-didymitis, or prostatitis. Most women will have symptoms of infection that include vagi-
nal itching, dyspareunia, and malodorous discharge. These symptoms do not distinguishTrichomonas  infection from other forms of vaginitis, such as bacterial vaginosis. Tricho-
moniasis is not a self-limited infection and should be treated for symptomatic and publichealth reasons. Wet-mount examination for motile trichomonads has a sensitivity of 50–60% in routine examination. Direct immunoﬂuorescent antibody staining of secretionsis more sensitive and can also be performed immediately. Culture is not widely available
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 133
and takes 3–7 days. Treatment should consist of metronidazole either as a single 2-g dose
or 500-mg doses twice daily for 7 days; all sexual partners should be treated. Trichomoni-asis resistant to metronidazole has been reported and is managed with increased doses ofmetronidazole or with tinidazole.
IV-15. The answer is E.   (Chap. 204)   Babesiosis due to B. microti  is transmitted to humans by
the hard-bodied tick. The infection occurs mostly in coastal southern New England and
eastern Long Island; however, cases have been reported in New Y ork, Pennsylvania, Wis-consin, and Minnesota. Most cases of babesiosis are probably never recognized becausethe most common (25% of adults) presentation is either asymptomatic or indistinguish-able from many other self-limited acute febrile illnesses. After an incubation of 1–6 weeksafter a tick bite, patients may develop fever (intermittent or sustained as high as 40 °C),
malaise, shaking chills, myalgias, and arthralgias. Severe infection is most common inasplenic patients and the elderly and in immunosuppressed patients (HIV , malignancy,immunosuppressive medications). Patients co-infected with Borrelia burgdorferi  (Lyme
disease) are also at risk of severe infection. It is notable for an enormous parasitemia that
can reach as high as 85% and is associated with hemolysis, high-output congestive heartfailure, and renal and respiratory failure.
IV-16. The answer is D.   (Chap. 191)   Voriconazole is an azole antifungal with a broader spec-
trum of activity than ﬂuconazole against Candida  species (including C. glabrata  and C.
krusei ) and has activity against Aspergillus  species. It is available in oral and parenteral
forms. Voriconazole’s visual disturbances are common, transient, and harmless, but pa-tients should be warned to expect them. Voriconazole interacts signiﬁcantly with manyother medications, including immunosuppressive agents, such as tacrolimus, that are of-ten used in patients at risk for systemic fungal infections. Voriconazole may also causeliver toxicity and photosensitivity. Renal toxicity is an issue with amphotericin B prod-ucts rather than the azoles.
IV-17. The answer is D.   (Chap. 177)   Immunocompromised patients occasionally can’t clear
parvovirus infection due to lack of T cell function. As parvovirus B19 selectively infects red
cell precursors, persistent infection can lead to a prolonged red cell aplasia and persistentdrop in hematocrit, with low or absent reticulocytes. Pure red cell aplasia has been reportedin HIV infection, lymphoproliferative diseases, and after transplantation. Iron studies willshow adequate iron but decreased utilization. The peripheral smear usually shows no ab-normalities other than normocytic anemia and the absence of reticulocytes. Antibody testsare not useful in this setting as immunocompromised patients do not produce adequate an-tibodies against the virus. Therefore, a PCR is the most useful diagnostic test. Bone marrowbiopsy may be suggestive as it will show no red cell precursors, but usually a less invasivePCR test is adequate. Immediate therapy is with red cell transfusion, followed by IV immu-noglobulins, which contain adequate titers of antibody against parvovirus B19.
IV-18. The answer is C.   (Chap. 141)   Legionella  is an intracellular pathogen that enters the
body through aspiration or direct inhalation. Numerous prospective studies have foundit is one of the four most common causes of community-acquired pneumonia withStreptococcus pneumoniae ,Haemophilus inﬂuenzae , and Chlamydia pneumoniae  account-
ing for 2–9% of cases. Postoperative patients are at risk due to an increased risk of aspira-
tion. Cell-mediated immunity is the primary host defense against Legionella , and patients
with HIV or those who take glucocorticoids are at risk based on their depressed cell-mediated immune function. Alveolar macrophages phagocytose Legionella . Smokers and
those with chronic lung disease are at risk given their poor local immune responses anddecreased ability for widespread phagocytosis. Neutrophils play a comparatively smallrole in the host defense against Legionella , and those with neutropenia are not predis-
posed to Legionella  infection.
IV-19. The answer is D.   (Chap. 195)   The goal of therapy for cryptococcal meningoencephali-
tis in an HIV-negative patient is cure of the fungal infection, not simply control of symp-toms. Thus, the course of IV amphotericin is recommended to be 10 weeks with negative
134 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) cultures, a decreasing CSF cryptococcal antigen titer, and a
normalized CSF glucose value. Once this is completed and clinical response has beenachieved, therapy is followed by ﬂuconazole to complete a 6- to 12-month course. The 2-week amphotericin can be used in clinically responding HIV-positive patients, who thenwill require 8 weeks of ﬂuconazole, 400 mg daily, followed by lifelong suppressive therapywith ﬂuconazole, 200 mg daily. Flucytosine has been used to accelerate a negative cultureresponse, but its use exposes the patient to potentially severe toxicities. Ceftriaxone andvancomycin are the recommended treatments for bacterial meningitis in an immuno-competent patient <50 years of age.
IV-20. The answer is C.   (Chap. 129)   The major clinical concern in this patient is epidural ab-
scess or vertebral osteomyelitis, as well as line infection due to Staphylococcus aureus .
Metastatic seeding during S. aureus bacteremia has been estimated to occur as often as30% of the time. Bones, joints, kidneys, and lungs are the most common sites. Metastaticinfection to the spine should be evaluated in an emergent fashion with an MRI. The dial-
ysis catheter should also be removed as it is infected, based on clinical examination. In-fective endocarditis is a major concern. This diagnosis is based on positive blood cultureresults and either a vegetation on echocardiogram, new pathologic murmur, or evidenceof septic embolization on physical examination. A transthoracic echocardiogram is war-
ranted in the evaluation for endocarditis (a disease that this patient is at risk for). How-ever, it need not be ordered emergently as it will not impact management during theinitial phase of hospitalization. Moreover, because the diagnosis can only be establishedin the presence of positive blood cultures (or in rare cases serology of a difﬁcult-to-culture organism), a rational approach is to await positive blood cultures before orderingan echocardiogram.
IV-21. The answer is B.   (Chap. 210)   Strongyloides is the only helminth that can replicate in
the human host, allowing autoinfection. Humans acquire strongyloides when larvae infecally contaminated soil penetrate the skin or mucus membranes. The larvae migrate tothe lungs via the bloodstream, break through the alveolar spaces, ascend the respiratoryairways, and are swallowed to reach the small intestine where they mature into adultworms. Adult worms may penetrate the mucosa of the small intestine. Strongyloides isendemic in Southeast Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, Brazil, and the Southern United States.Many patients with strongyloides are asymptomatic or have mild gastrointestinal symp-toms or the characteristic cutaneous eruption, larval currens, as described in this case.Small-bowel obstruction may occur with early heavy infection. Eosinophilia is commonwith all clinical manifestations. In patients with impaired immunity, particularly gluco-
corticoid therapy, hyperinfection or dissemination may occur. This may lead to colitis,enteritis, meningitis, peritonitis, and acute renal failure. Bacteremia or gram-negative
sepsis may develop due to bacterial translocation through disrupted enteric mucosa. Be-cause of the risk of hyperinfection, all patients with strongyloides, even asymptomaticcarriers, should be treated with ivermectin, which is more effective than albendazole. Flu-conazole is used to treat candidal infections. Mebendazole is used to treat trichuriasis, en-terobiasis (pinworm), ascariasis, and hookworm. Meﬂoquine is used for malariaprophylaxis.
IV-22. The answer is A.   (Chap. 120)   The Gram stain is polymicrobial and the putrid smell is
very speciﬁc for anaerobic organisms. The diagnosis of acute osteomyelitis is also verylikely based on the positive probe to bone test and wide ulcer. Broad-spectrum antibioticsare indicated. Vancomycin and linezolid cover methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) and streptococcal isolates but would miss gram-negative rods and anaerobicbacteria. Metronidazole covers only anaerobes, missing gram-positives that are key in theinitiation of diabetic foot infections. Clindamycin covers gram-positives and anaerobesbut misses gram-negative rods. Ampicillin-sulbactam is broad spectrum and covers allthree classes of organism. If the patient has a history of MRSA or MRSA risk factors, thenthe addition of vancomycin or linezolid is a strong consideration.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 135
IV-23. The answer is C.   (Chap. 182)   The quoted risk for HIV transmission via a needle stick is
0.3%. However, this number is likely highly variable according to a number of factors.
Large-bore needle sticks where infected patient blood is visible are higher risk, as are deeptissue puncture to the health care provider. The patient’s degree of virologic control isgenerally inferred to be critical as well. Patients with a viral load <1500/mL are consider-ably less likely to transmit via a needle stick than those with high viral loads. An exten-sion of this point is that during acute and end-stage HIV infection, viral loads areextremely high and contagion by needle stick is likely to be much higher. In addition,during end-stage disease, virulent viral forms predominate, which may increase the riskto an even greater extent. Each of these variables must be assessed rapidly after an acci-dental high-risk needle stick. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) is effective at preventing HIVtransmission via needle stick if given before viral RNA incorporates into the host genomeas proviral DNA. This is thought to occur within ~48 h, but under the best scenario, ARTshould be given within an hour of a needle stick. Circumstances are often murky, withkey information such as viral load, viral resistance history, and even HIV serostatus of thepatient variably available: therefore, urgent consultation with an HIV and/or occupa-tional health specialist is imperative after a needle stick. (Hepatitis B and C transmissionmust also be considered.)
IV-24. The answer is E.   (Chap. 172)   Antibodies to HSV-2 are not routinely detected until pu-
berty, consistent with the typical sexual transmission of the virus. Serosurveys suggest15–20% of American adults have HSV-2 infection. However, only 10% report a history ofgenital lesions. Seroprevalence is similar or higher in Central America, South America,and Africa. Recent studies in African obstetric clinics have found seroprevalence rates ashigh as 70%. HSV-2 infection is felt to be so pervasive in the general population based onease of transmission, both in symptomatic and asymptomatic states. Therefore, this sexu-ally transmitted disease (STD) is signiﬁcantly more common in individuals who less fre-quently engage in high-risk behavior than other STDs. HSV-2 is an independent riskfactor for HIV acquisition and transmission. HIV virion is shed from herpetic lesions,thus promoting transmission.
IV-25. The answer is B.   (Chap. 193)   Coccidioidomycosis is amazingly diverse in terms of its
scope of clinical presentation, as well as clinical severity. 60% of infections as determined
by serologic conversion are asymptomatic. The most common clinical syndrome in the
other 40% of infected patients is an acute respiratory illness characterized by fever,cough, and pleuritic pain. Skin manifestations, such as erythema nodosum, are also com-mon with Coccidioides infection.  Coccidioides  infection can cause a severe and difﬁcult-
to-treat meningitis in AIDS patients, other immunocompromised patients, and occa-sionally immunocompetent hosts, and can occasionally cause acute respiratory distresssyndrome and fatal multilobar pneumonia.  Coccidioides  is conﬁned to the western hemi-
sphere. Endemic regions include Southern Arizona, the Central Valley of California, andNorthern Mexico, where it resides in soil. The risk of symptomatic infection increaseswith age.
IV-26.  and.  IV-27.   The answers are B and E.   (Chap. 122)   Norovirus, or the so-called Norwalk-
like agent, was initially described as a cause of food-borne illness in Norwalk, Ohio, in1968. Since that time the virus responsible has been identiﬁed as a small RNA virus of theCalciviridae family. The initial detection of the Norwalk agent was poor, relying on elec-tron microscopy or immune electron microscopy. Using these techniques, the Norwalkagent was identiﬁed as the causative agent in 19–42% of nonbacterial diarrheal out-breaks. With the development of more sensitive molecular assays (reverse transcriptasePCR, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), Norwalk-like viruses are being found as in-creasingly frequent causes of diarrheal outbreaks. Treatment is supportive as symptomsimprove within 10–51 h. Rotavirus is the most common cause of viral diarrhea in infantsbut is uncommon in adults. Salmonella, shigella, and E. coli  present with more colonic
and systemic manifestations.
136 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
IV-28. The answer is C.   (Chap. 171)   Lamivudine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue that has
activity against HIV and hepatitis B. In acute hepatitis B, lamivudine results in suppres-
sion of HBV DNA and loss of hepatitis E antigen in 30% of patients. T enofovir is a nu-
cleotide analogue with activity against HIV and hepatitis B. It is not approved for initialtreatment for HBV but may be used for HIV/HBV co-infection or for HBV resistant tolamivudine. Efavirenz has activity only against HIV and not hepatitis B. Ganciclovir has
activity against herpes viruses and is mostly used for treatment of cytomegalovirus.Rimantadine has antiviral activity only against inﬂuenza A.
IV-29. The answer is E.   (Chap. 182)   Rate of progression from initial HIV infection to AIDS is
likely determined by many factors, but viral load set point, measured ~2–6 months afteracute infection, is the most predictive factor. Most persons have a median time of 10years, but rapid progressors with high viral loads can develop AIDS over 5 years whereassome “long-term nonprogressors” with low viral load set points can be asymptomaticwith HIV infection for decades. CD4+ lymphocyte count is a measure of how close one is
to developing AIDS rather than a measure of rate of progression: it tends to be close tonormal once viral load set point is achieved. Resistance of the virus is more of a determi-nant of response to speciﬁc therapies than disease progression in the absence of therapy.CMV serology is important as a predictor for CMV disease once a person reaches a CD4+lymphocyte count < 50/ µL.
IV-30. The answer is D.   (Chap. 161)   Drugs used to treat Mycobacterium tuberculosis  are classi-
ﬁed as ﬁrst-line or second-line. First-line agents, which are proven most effective and arenecessary for any short-course treatment regimen, include isoniazid, rifampin, ethambu-tol, and pyrazinamide. First-line supplemental agents, which are highly effective with ac-ceptable toxicity, include rifabutin, rifapentine, and streptomycin. Second-line agents,
which are either less clinically active or have greater toxicity, include para-aminosalicylicacid, ethionamide, cycloserine, amikacin, and capreomycin. The ﬂuoroquinolones, levo-ﬂoxacin and moxiﬂoxacin, are active against M. tuberculosis  but are not yet considered
ﬁrst-line therapy. While not approved for treatment of M. tuberculosis  in the United
States, promising trials are underway. Some experts consider moxiﬂoxacin a supplemen-tal ﬁrst-line therapy. It is necessary to have at least three active agents during the 2-monthinduction phase of active tuberculosis therapy. Ethambutol is initially used as a fourth
agent to account for the possibility of drug resistance to one of the other agents. Consoli-dation phase includes rifampin and isoniazid, and is 4–7 months in length, depending onanatomic location of infection as well as clearance of sputum cultures at 2 months.
IV-31. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 126 and 175)   CMV retinitis, a common CMV infection in
HIV patients, occurs very rarely in solid organ transplant patients. CMV does affect thelung in a majority of transplant patients if either donor or recipient is CMV-seropositivepretransplant. CMV disease in transplant recipients typically develops 30–90 days post-transplant. It rarely occurs within 2 weeks of transplantation. CMV very commonlycauses a pneumonitis that clinically is difﬁcult to distinguish from acute rejection. Prior
CMV infection has been associated with bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (chronic re-jection) in lung transplant recipients. As with HIV , the gastrointestinal tract is commonlyinvolved with CMV infection. Endoscopy with biopsy showing characteristic giant cells,not serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR), is necessary to make this diagnosis. TheCMV syndrome is also common in lung transplant patients. Serum CMV PCR should be
sent as part of the workup for all nonspeciﬁc fevers, worsening lung function, liver func-tion abnormalities, or falling leukocyte counts occurring more than a couple of weeks af-ter transplant.
IV-32. The answer is D.   (Chap. 179)   In 2002, an outbreak of a severe systemic illness, named
severe acute respiratory syndrome , or SARS, began in China. Ultimately 8000 cases were
recorded in 28 countries. The etiologic agent proved to be a virus associated with theCoronavirus family, now named SARS -CoV . The natural reservoir appears to be the
horseshoe bat, though human exposure may have come from domesticated animals suchas the palm civet. While some patients acquired the virus from animals or the environ-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 137
ment, the majority appear to have contracted the illness from other people. Human-to-
human transmission, either by aerosol or fecal-oral routes, is efﬁcient. Environmentaltransmission (water, sewage) may also have played a role, particularly in the outbreakcentered in an apartment complex. In the outbreak, children had a much less severe clin-ical course compared to adults. In 2003 the outbreak ceased, and no new cases havearisen since 2004. Many unanswered questions linger in the wake of this illness.
IV-33. The answer is D.   (Chap. 141)   Legionella  urine antigen is detectable within 3 days of
symptoms and will remain positive for 2 months. It is not affected by antibiotic use. Theurinary antigen test is formulated to detect only L.pneumophilia  (which causes 80% of
Legionella  infections) but cross-reactivity with other Legionella  species has been reported.
The urinary test is sensitive and highly speciﬁc. Typically, Gram’s staining of specimensfrom sterile sites such as pleural ﬂuid show numerous white blood cells but no organ-isms. However, Legionella  may appear as faint, pleomorphic gram-negative bacilli. Le-
gionella  may be cultured from sputum even when epithelial cells are present. Cultures,
grown on selective media, take 3–5 days to show visible growth. Antibody detection usingacute and convalescent serum is an accurate means of diagnosis. A fourfold rise is diag-nostic, but this takes up to 12 weeks so is most useful for epidemiologic investigation.  Le-
gionella  PCR has not been shown to be adequately sensitive and speciﬁc for clinical use. It
is used for environmental sampling.
IV-34. The answer is D.   (Chap. 209)   There are roughly 12 cases of trichinellosis reported each
year in the United States. Since most infections are asymptomatic, this may be an under-estimate. Heavy infections can cause enteritis, periorbital edema, myositis, and, infre-quently, death. This infection, caused by ingesting Trichinella  cysts, occurs when infected
meat from pigs or other carnivorous animals is eaten. Laws that prevent feeding pigs un-cooked garbage have been an important public health measure in reducing Trichinella  in-
fection in this country. Person-to-person spread has not been described. The majority ofinfections are mild and resolve spontaneously.
IV-35. The answer is E.   (Chap. 172)   Primary genital herpes due to HSV-2 is characterized by
fever, headache, malaise, inguinal lymphadenopathy, and diffuse genital lesions of vary-ing stage. The cervix and urethra are usually involved in women. While both HSV-2 andHSV-1 can involve the genitals, the recurrence rate of HSV-2 is much higher (90% in theﬁrst year) than with HSV-1 (55% in the ﬁrst year). The rate of reactivation for HSV-2 isvery high. Acyclovir (or its cogeners valacyclovir and famciclovir) is effective in shorten-ing the duration of symptoms and lesions in genital herpes. Chronic daily therapy can re-duce the frequency of recurrences in those with frequent reactivation. Valacyclovir hasbeen shown to reduce transmission of HSV-2 between sexual partners.
IV-36. The answer is C.   (Chap. 122)   Enterotoxigenic E. coli  is responsible for 50% of traveler’s
diarrhea in Latin America and 15% in Asia. Enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative E. coli
are the most common isolates from persons with classic secretory traveler’s diarrhea.Treatment of frequent watery stools due to presumed E. coli  infection may be with cipro-
ﬂoxacin, or because of concerns regarding increasing ciproﬂoxacin resistance, azithromy-cin. E. histolytica  and V. c h o l e ra e  account for smaller percentages of traveler’s diarrhea in
Mexico. Campylobacter  is more common in Asia and during the winter in subtropical ar-
eas. Giardia  is associated with contaminated water supplies and in campers who drink
from freshwater streams.
IV-37. The answer is E.   (Chap. 209)   Trichinellosis occurs when infected meat products are
eaten, most frequently pork. The organism can also be transmitted through the ingestionof meat from dogs, horses, and bears. Recent outbreaks in the United States and Canadahave been related to consumption of wild game, particularly bear meat. During the ﬁrstweek of infection, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting are prominent features. As the para-sites migrate from the GI tract, fever and eosinophilia are often present. Larvae encyst af-ter 2–3 weeks in muscle tissue, leading to myositis and weakness. Myocarditis andmaculopapular rash are less common features of this illness. Giardia  and Campylobacter
138 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
are organisms that are frequently acquired by drinking contaminated water; neither will
produce this pattern of disease. While both will cause GI symptoms (and Campylobacter
will cause fever), neither will cause eosinophilia or myositis. Taenia solium , or pork tape-
worm, shares a similar pathogenesis to Trichinella  but does not cause myositis. Cytomeg-
alovirus has varied presentations but none that lead to this presentation.
IV-38. The answer is E.   (Chap. 182)   Abacavir use is associated with a potentially severe hyper-
sensitivity reaction in about 5% of patients. There is likely a genetic component, withHLA-B*5701 being a signiﬁcant risk factor for hypersensitivity syndrome. Symptoms,which usually occur within 2 weeks of therapy but can take >6 weeks to emerge, includefever, maculopapular rash, fatigue, malaise, gastrointestinal symptoms, and/or dyspnea.Once a diagnosis is suspected, the drug should be stopped and never given again becauserechallenge can be fatal. For this reason, both the diagnosis and patient education oncethe diagnosis is made must be performed thoroughly and carefully. It is important tonote that two available combination pills contain abacavir (epzicom, trizivir), so patientsmust know to avoid these as well. Fanconi’s anemia is a rare disorder associated with
tenofovir. Zidovudine causes anemia and sometimes granulocytopenia. Stavudine andother nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are associated with lipoatrophy of theface and legs.
IV-39. The answer is C.   (Chap. 129)   In recent years, the emergence of “community acquired”
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (CA-MRSA) in numerous populations has
been well documented. This pathogen most commonly leads to pyogenic infections ofthe skin but has also been associated with necrotizing fasciitis, infectious pyomyositis, en-docarditis, and osteomyelitis. The most feared complication is a necrotizing pneumoniathat often follows inﬂuenza upper respiratory infection and can affect previously healthypeople. This pathogen produces the Panton-Valentine leukocidin protein that formsholes in the membranes of neutrophils as they arrive at the site of infection, and serves asmarker for this pathogen. An easy way to identify this strain of MRSA is its sensitivityproﬁle. Unlike MRSA isolates of the past, which were sensitive only to vancomycin, dap-tomycin, quinupristin/dalfopristin, and linezolid, CA-MRSA are almost uniformly sus-ceptible to TMP/SMX and doxycycline as well. The organism is also usually sensitive toclindamycin. The term community -acquired  has probably outlived its usefulness as this
isolate has become the most common S. aureus  isolate causing infection in many hospi-
tals around the world.
IV-40. The answer is D.   (Chap. 144)   Helicobacter pylori  is thought to colonize ~50% (30% in
developed countries, >80% in developing countries) of the world’s population. The or-ganism induces a direct tissue response in the stomach, with evidence of mononuclearand polymorphonuclear inﬁltrates in all of those with colonization, regardless of whetheror not symptoms are present. Gastric ulceration and adenocarcinoma of the stomacharise in association with this gastritis. MALT is speciﬁc to H. pylori  infection and is due to
prolonged B cell activation in the stomach. Though H. pylori  does not directly infect the
intestine, it does diminish somatostatin production, indirectly contributing to the devel-opment of duodenal ulcers. Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease is not caused by H. pylori ,
and some early, controversial research may suggest that it is in fact protective against thiscondition.
IV-41. The answer is D.   (Chap. 177)   The most likely diagnosis based on her antecedent illness
with a facial rash is parvovirus infection. Parvovirus commonly leads to a diffuse sym-
metric arthritis in the immune phase of illness when IgM antibodies are developed. Oc-casionally the arthritis persists over months and can mimic rheumatoid arthritis. Theacute nature of these complaints makes systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoidarthritis less likely. Reactive arthritis due to Chlamydia  or a list of other bacterial patho-
gens tends to effect large joints such as the sacroiliac joints and spine. It is also sometimes
accompanied by uveitis and urethritis. The large number of joints involved with a sym-metric distribution argues against crystal or septic arthropathy.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 139
IV-42. The answer is C.   (Chap. 196)   Isolation of yeast from the blood stream can virtually
never be considered a contaminant. Presentation may be indolent with malaise only, or
fulminant with overwhelming sepsis in the neutropenic host. All indwelling catheters
need to be removed to ensure clearance of infection, and evaluation for endocarditis andendophthalmitis should be strongly considered, particularly in patients with persistentlypositive cultures or fever. Both of these complications of fungemia often entail surgical
intervention for cure. A positive yeast culture in the urine is often difﬁcult to interpret,particularly in patients on antibiotics and in the ICU. Most frequently, a positive culturefor yeast represents contamination, even if the urinalysis suggests bladder inﬂammation.An attractive option is to remove the Foley catheter and recheck a culture. Antifungals
are indicated if the patient appears ill, in the context of renal transplant where fungalballs can develop in the graft, and often in neutropenic patients. Candida  pneumonia is
uncommon, even in immunocompromised patients. A positive yeast culture of the spu-tum is usually representative of commensal oral ﬂora and should not be managed as aninfection, particularly as in this case where acute bacterial pneumonia is likely.
IV-43. The answer is D.   (Chap. 123)   Clostridium difﬁcile –associated disease recurrences are
most often due to reinfection (because patients carry similar risk factors as they did be-fore ﬁrst infection) or relapse (due to persistence of spores in the bowel). Approximately15–30% of patients have at least one relapse. Recurrent disease has been associated with~10% risk of serious complications including shock, megacolon, perforation, colectomy,or death at 30 days. Metronidazole resistance occurs but is actually a very rare event. Met-ronidazole and vancomycin have a similar efﬁcacy in a ﬁrst episode of recurrence. Re-peated courses of metronidazole should be avoided due to neurotoxicity. Unfortunately,patients who recur are more likely to recur again, and many patients receive multiple cy-cles of antibiotics and are even candidates for more extreme measures such as intrave-nous immunoglobulin or fecal transplant via stool enema. T esting for clearance is notlikely to be informative. A negative stool antigen would not change management, assymptomatic improvement is the true goal of therapy. A positive stool antigen and toxintest in a patient whose symptoms have improved after standard therapy implies coloniza-tion, not disease. It can therefore be needlessly discouraging to patients and again does
not impact clinical management. There is no known association between C. difﬁcile –
associated disease and colon cancer.
IV-44. The answer is B.   (Chap. 182)   CMV colitis should be considered in AIDS patients with
CD4+ lymphocyte count <50/ µL, fevers, and diarrhea. Diarrhea is often bloody but can
be watery. Initial evaluation often involves stool studies to rule out other parasitic or bac-
terial causes of diarrhea in AIDS patients. A standard panel will include some or all of thefollowing depending on epidemiologic and historical data: Clostridium difﬁcile  stool anti-
gen, stool culture, stool Mycobacterium avium intracellulare  culture, stool ova and para-
site examination and special stains for Cryptosporidium, Isospora, Cyclospora  and
Microsporidium. There is no stool or serum test that is useful for the evaluation of CMV
colitis in an HIV-infected patient. A positive CMV IgG is merely a marker of past infec-tion. If this test is negative, then the pretest probability of developing active CMV de-
creases substantially. Serum CMV PCR has gained utility in solid organ and bonemarrow transplant patients for following treatment response for invasive CMV infection.However, in HIV-infected patients, CMV viremia correlates imprecisely with colitis. Fur-ther, because CMV is a latent-lytic herpesvirus, a positive serum PCR does not imply dis-ease unless drawn in the right clinical context, for which there is none in HIV infection.Colonic histology is sensitive and speciﬁc for the diagnosis of CMV colitis, with large-cellinclusion bodies being diagnostic.
IV-45. The answer is D.   (Chap. 143)   β-lactamases are a major source of antibiotic resistance in
gram-negative bacilli. Many gram-negative bacteria produce broad-spectrum β-lactamases
that confer resistance to penicillins and ﬁrst-generation cephalosporins. The addition ofclavulanate, a β-lactamase inhibitor, to an antibiotic regimen is often enough to overcome
this resistance. Extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL), however, lead to resistance to all
140 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
β-lactam drugs including third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins. ESBL-producing
genes can be acquired by gram-negative bacteria via plasmids and are becoming increas-
ingly prevalent in hospitals worldwide. Klebsiella  and Escherichia coli are the most common
bacteria that acquire ESBLs, though it can be seen in many other gram-negatives includingSerratia, Proteus ,Enterobacter , and Citrobacter . The most common scenario for the devel-
opment of ESBL-gram negatives in the hospital is prevalent use of third-generation cepha-losporins. Carbapenems should be considered ﬁrst-line antibiotics for these bacteria.Macrolides and quinolones have different mechanisms of action than β-lactam antibiotics
and do not apply selective pressure to generate ESBL-producing bacteria.
IV-46. The answer is E.   (Chap. 164)   The patient has Weil’s syndrome due to infection with
Leptospira interrogans  as evidenced by her ﬂulike prodrome followed by profound hyper-
bilirubinemia with only minor hepatocellular dysfunction as well as renal failure. Rats arethe most important reservoir. The organism is excreted in urine and can survive in waterfor months. Important sources of exposure include occupational, recreation in contami-nated waters, and being homeless in contaminated living areas. Weil’s represents the im-mune phase of the disease in its most severe form. A bleeding diathesis is common, as is
pulmonary hemorrhage. The conjunctival suffusion during the initial spirochetemicphase of the disease is an important diagnostic clue. Penicillin G is appropriate therapyfor severe leptospirosis, but its comparative efﬁcacy is not yet proven in the literature.Acute myelogenous leukemia would likely cause more characteristic abnormalities inblood counts with this degree of illness. Acute interstitial pneumonitis (Haman-Richsyndrome) affects only the lung and would not be associated with the severe increases inbilirubin. Polyarteritis nodosa rarely involved the lung and would not be expected tocause such a high bilirubin, even in the setting of hepatic ischemia. Rat-bite fever causesintermittent fevers, polyarthritis, and a nonspeciﬁc rash.
IV-47. The answer is B.   (Chap. 167)   Rocky Mountain spotted fever, caused by Rickettsia rick-
ettsii , occurs throughout the United States, Canada, Mexico, Central America, and South
America. It is transmitted by the dog tick in the eastern two-thirds of the United Statesand by the wood tick in the western United States. Humans are typically infected duringtick season from May through September. In the preantibiotic era, the case fatality rateapproached 25%. Currently the mortality remains ~5%, mostly due to delayed recogni-tion and therapy. The incubation period after a tick bite is approximately 1 week. The ini-tial signs and symptoms of Rocky Mountain spotted fever are entirely nonspeciﬁc, andthe typical rash is often not seen in early disease. It may be difﬁcult to distinguish frommany self-limited viral syndromes. Only 60% of patients recall a tick bite, and only 3% ofpatients have the classic history of tick bite, fever, and rash. Therefore, assessment for thispotentially deadly disease should be based on epidemiologic grounds. His recent high-risk travel period for tick bite in a highly endemic region makes this patient a high pretestprobability. Empirical treatment is warranted and will not affect the diagnostic workup.A diagnostic indirect immunoﬂuorescent antibody test will not be positive ( ≥1:64 titer)
until 7–10 days after symptoms. The only diagnostic test that is useful during the acuteillness is immunohistochemical staining for R. rickettsii of a biopsy from a skin rash.
Doxycycline is effective therapy and should be continued until the patient is afebrile andimproving clinically for 2–3 days.
IV-48. The answer is D.   (Chap. 118)   This patient meets three of the ﬁve minor criteria: fever
≥38.0°C, predisposition of injection drug use, and evidence of vascular phenomena (septic
pulmonary infarction on chest radiography). Two remaining minor criteria are not met ornot described above: immunologic phenomena (glomerulonephritis, Osler’s nodes, Roth’sspots, rheumatoid factor) and microbiologic phenomena (positive blood cultures that donot meet major criteria or positive serology for an organism likely to cause endocarditis).Major criteria include positive blood cultures and evidence of endocardial involvement(echocardiographic or new valvular regurgitation). With three minor criteria and no ma-jor criteria described above, this patient should be considered to possibly have infectiveendocarditis, and the remainder of the workup should be pursued to rule in or out this di-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 141
agnosis. A complete physical examination with particular attention to the joints, skin, and
cardiovascular system and an echocardiogram would be crucial next steps for this patient.
IV-49. The answer is B.   (Chap. 180)   There are inactivated and live, attenuated forms of inﬂu-
enza vaccine. The intranasal spray, marketed as “Flu-mist,” is a live, attenuated virus andis not recommended for the elderly or immunocompromised patients. This vaccine hassimilar efﬁcacy to the intramuscular vaccine, which is an inactivated, or “killed,” prepara-tion of the previous year’s strains of inﬂuenza A and B. The intramuscular vaccine ismanufactured using egg products; patients with true egg hypersensitivity should not re-ceive it. It is safe for elderly and immunocompromised patients. In the past, inﬂuenzavaccines have been associated with Guillain-Barré syndrome. This association has notbeen demonstrated in the past decade, despite close surveillance. Patients do not need tobe warned of this side effect.
IV-50. The answer is C.   (Chap. 172)   Infection with HSV-1 is acquired more frequently and
earlier than with HSV-2. More than 90% of adults have serologic evidence of HSV-1 in-fection by age 40. Primary HSV-1 usually causes pharyngitis and gingivostomatitis andmost commonly occurs in children and young adults. Clinical manifestations of primaryinfection include fever, malaise, myalgias, and adenopathy. There are usually exudative or
ulcerative lesions of the pharynx or tonsils. It may be difﬁcult to distinguish from bacte-rial pharyngitis. Herpes labialis is the most common clinical manifestation of HSV-1 re-currence. Pharyngitis is uncommon with recurrence. HSV-1 resides in latency in thetrigeminal ganglia, but trigeminal neuralgia is not a feature of primary infection. HSV-2recurrence generally causes genital ulcers.
IV-51. The answer is D.   (Chap. 208)   Giardia lamblia  is one of the most common parasitic dis-
eases, with worldwide distribution. It occurs in developed and developing countries. In-fection follows ingestion of environmental cysts, which excyst in the small intestinereleasing ﬂagellated trophozoites. Giardia  does not disseminate hematogenously; it re-
mains in the small intestine. Cysts are excreted in stool, which accounts for person-to-person spread; however, they do not survive for prolonged periods in feces. Ingestion of
contaminated water sources is another major form of infection. Giardia  cysts can thrive
in cold water for months. Filtering or boiling water will remove cysts. As few as 10 cystscan cause human disease, which has a broad spectrum of presentations. Most infectedpatients are asymptomatic. Symptoms in infected patients are due to small-intestinal dys-
function. Typical early symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal pain, bloating, nausea,vomiting, ﬂatus, and belching. Diarrhea is a very common complaint, particularly early,
but in some patients constipation will occur. Later, diarrhea may resolve, with malab-sorption symptoms predominating. The presence of fever, eosinophilia, blood or mucusin stools, or colitis symptoms should suggest an alternative diagnosis. Diagnosis is madeby demonstrating parasite antigens, cysts, or trophozoites in the stool.
IV-52. The answer is B.   (Chap. 162)   The patient’s clinical examination is consistent with pri-
mary syphilis and he should receive appropriate therapy. In primary syphilis, 25% of pa-
tients will have negative nontreponemal tests for syphilis (RPR or VDRL). A single doseof long-acting benzathine penicillin is the recommended treatment for primary, second-ary, and early latent syphilis. Ceftriaxone is the treatment of choice for gonorrhea, butthis lesion is not consistent with that diagnosis. Ceftriaxone given daily for 7–10 days isan alternative treatment for primary and secondary syphilis. Acyclovir is the drug ofchoice for genital herpes. Herpetic lesions are classically multiple and painful. Observa-tion is not an option because the chancre will resolve spontaneously without treatmentand the patient will remain infected and infectious.
IV-53. The answer is D.   (Chap. 180)   The majority of inﬂuenza infections are clinically mild and
self-limited. Treatment with over-the-counter cough suppressants and analgesics such as ace-taminophen is often adequate. Patients who are under the age of 18 are at risk of developingReye’s syndrome if exposed to salicylates such as aspirin. The neuraminidase inhibitors osel-tamivir and zanamivir have activity against inﬂuenza A and B. They can be used within 2
142 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
days of symptom onset and have been shown to reduce the duration of symptoms by a day or
two. This patient has had symptoms for >48 h, therefore neither drug is likely to be effective.The patient’s history of asthma is an additional contraindication to zanamivir, as this drugcan precipitate bronchospasm. The M2 inhibitors, amantadine and rimantadine, have activ-ity against inﬂuenza A only. However, in 2005 >90% of A/H3N2 viral isolates demonstrated
resistance to amantadine, and these drugs are no longer recommended for use in inﬂuenza A.
IV-54. The answer is F .   (Chap. 144)   It is impossible to know whether the patient’s continued
dyspepsia is due to persistent H. pylori  as a result of treatment failure or to some other
cause. A quick noninvasive test to look for the presence of H. pylori  is a urea breath test.
This test can be done as an outpatient and gives a rapid, accurate response. Patientsshould not have received any proton pump inhibitors or antimicrobials in the meantime.Stool antigen test is another good option if urea breath testing is not available. If the ureabreath test is positive >1 month after completion of ﬁrst-line therapy, second-line ther-apy with a proton pump inhibitor, bismuth subsalicylate, tetracycline, and metronidazolemay be indicated. If the urea breath test is negative, the remaining symptoms are unlikelydue to persistent H. pylori  infection. Serology is useful only for diagnosing infection ini-
tially, but it can remain positive and therefore misleading in those who have cleared H.
pylori. Endoscopy is a consideration to rule out ulcer or upper gastrointestinal malig-
nancy but is generally preferred after two failed attempts to eradicate H. pylori .
IV-55. The answer is E. (Chap. 161)   Streptomycin is an aminoglycoside ﬁrst-line supplemen-
tal agent for treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis ,M.marinum , and M.kansasii . It is
only available for IM or IV use and is not commonly utilized in the United States becauseof toxicity. Adverse reactions occur in 10–20% of patients. Renal toxicity and ototoxicity
are most common. Ototoxicity may involve hearing and vestibular function. Like otheraminoglycosides, it is eliminated almost exclusively by renal mechanisms, so drug levelsmust be followed along with renal function. Isoniazid and rifampin must be avoided inpatients with severe hepatic toxicity. Pyrazinamide is also metabolized by liver and
should be used carefully in patients with liver disease.FIGURE IV-54 Algorithm for the management of Helicobacter pylori  infection. *Occasion-
ally, an endoscopy and a biopsy-based test are used instead of a urea breath test in follow-up
after treatment. The main indication for these invasive tests is gastric ulceration; in this condi-
tion, as opposed to duodenal ulceration, it is important to check healing and to exclude un-
derlying gastric adenocarcinoma. †Some authorities now use empirical third-line regimens,
several of which have been described.Indication for H. pylori treatment
(e.g., peptic ulcer disease or new-onset dyspepsia)
Test for H. pylori
Urea breath test*Any remaining 
symptoms are not 
due to H. pyloriH. pylori 
not the cause
Second-line treatmentFirst-line treatment
Positive after
second-line treatmentWait at least 1 month after
treatment finishes (no antibiotics, 
bismuth compounds, or proton
pump inhibitors in the meantime)
Third-line treatment;
endoscopy with H. pylori culture and 
sensitivity testing; treat according 
to known antibiotic sensitivities†Positive after
third-line treatmentNegativeNegative
PositivePositive
Refer to specialist
Consider whether treatment
is still indicated(Table 144-2)(Table 144-2) 
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 143
IV-56. The answer is E.   (Chap. 178)   There will soon be two available HPV vaccines. Gardasil
(Merck) is currently licensed and contains HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18; Cervarix (Glaxo-
SmithKline) is pending ﬁnal regulatory approval and contains HPV types 16 and 18.HPV types 6 and 11 cause 90% of anogenital warts. HPV 16 and 18 cause 70% of cervicalcancers. Both vaccines consist of virus-like particles without any viral nucleic acid, there-fore are not active. Both provide nearly 100% protection against two common oncogenicstrains of HPV (16 and 18) but neglect to cover the other strains that cause up to 30% ofcervical cancer. Because the vaccines do not protect against all oncogenic HPV serotypes,it is recommended that Pap screening of women for cervical cancer continue according toprior schedules. The vaccine should be given to girls and young women between the agesof 9 and 26 provided that they do not have evidence of infection with both HPV 16 and18 already.
IV-57. The answer is B.   (Chap. 184)   These lesions are diagnostic of herpangina, which is
caused by coxsackievirus A. They are typically round and discrete, which helps differentiatethem from thrush caused by Candida  species. Unlike HSV stomatitis, herpangina lesions
are not associated with gingivitis. Herpangina usually presents with dysphagia, odynopha-gia, and fever; these lesions can persist for several weeks. The lesions do not ulcerate.
IV-58. The answer is E.   (Chap. 116)   Vaccines have impacted world health in an overwhelm-
ingly positive way with the near disappearance of many infections from the developedworld as a result of mass vaccination policies. Inevitably with the decline of many vac-cine-preventable illnesses in modern society, fear of these diseases has been supplantedby legitimate concerns for the safety of the vaccines themselves. There has been particularattention among the public and medical ﬁeld regarding the MMR vaccine due to the useof thimerosal, a mercury-containing preservative widely used in vaccines since the 1930s.Several, large-scale, carefully performed epidemiologic studies in the United States andnorthern Europe have shown no association between the use of these vaccines and au-tism or other brain development disorders. Nevertheless, autism incidence is increasing,and the proximity in age between development of autism and administration of vaccinehas allowed this debate to continue in the lay press and among autism advocacy groups.World governing bodies including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,World Health Organization, and the Food and Drug Administration have formally re-jected any causal link between vaccines and autism, but as a cautionary measure, thi-merosal has been discontinued in pediatric vaccines in the United States, most notably inMMR. It is noteworthy that when vaccine coverage rates go below a certain threshold,outbreaks of vaccine-preventable illnesses invariably occur. It is important for physicians
to be able to communicate this complex information accurately to patients in the currenthealth and policy environment.
IV-59. The answer is D.   (Chap. 130)   Recurrent episodes of rheumatic fever are most common
in the ﬁrst 5 years after the initial diagnosis. Penicillin prophylaxis is recommended for atleast this period. After the ﬁrst 5 years secondary prophylaxis is determined on an indi-vidual basis. Ongoing prophylaxis is currently recommended for patients who have hadrecurrent disease, have rheumatic heart disease, or work in occupations that have a highrisk for reexposure to group A streptococcal infection. Prophylactic regimens are penicil-lin V , PO 250 mg bid, benzathine penicillin, 1.2 million units IM every 4 weeks, and sul-fadiazine, 1 g PO daily. Polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine has no cross-reactivity withgroup A streptococcus.
IV-60. The answer is D.   (Chap. 118)   While any valvular vegetation can embolize, vegetations
located on the mitral valve and vegetations >10 mm are greatest risk of embolizing. Ofthe choices above, C, D, and E are large enough to increase the risk of embolization.However, only choice D demonstrates the risks of both size and location. Hematoge-nously seeded infection from an embolized vegetation may involve any organ, but par-ticularly affects those organs with the highest blood ﬂow. They are seen in up to 50% ofpatients with endocarditis. Tricuspid lesions will lead to pulmonary septic emboli,common in injection drug users. Mitral and aortic lesions can lead to embolic infec-
144 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
tions in the skin, spleen, kidneys, meninges, and skeletal system. A dreaded neurologic
complication is mycotic aneurysm, focal dilations of arteries at points in the arterialwall that have been weakened by infection in the vasa vasorum or septic emboli, leadingto hemorrhage.
IV-61. The answer is A.   (Chap. 182)   The purpose of testing for latent tuberculosis (with either
PPD skin testing or whole-blood interferon assays) in any person is to detect latent tuber-culosis infection and treat at that stage to avoid development of active tuberculosis (TB).This strategy beneﬁts the individual patient and the greater public health. These issuesare more pressing in persons with HIV infection. The progression from latent to active
TB in an HIV-infected patient is estimated as high as 10% per year rather than 10% perlifetime as in the HIV-uninfected persons. In HIV-infected persons, active TB is clinicallypresent in extrapulmonary sites (kidney, central nervous system) and can be diagnosti-cally challenging. TB infection appears to accelerate HIV disease. The 6-month mortalityrate among co-infected patients is higher than in patients with HIV-infection alone. Rifa-mycin derivatives, used for active TB therapy, have fairly complex drug-drug interactionswith antiretroviral therapy (ART) agents often necessitating ART regimen exchange ordose adjustment. Appropriate therapy for active TB has similar efﬁcacy rates for myco-bacterial eradication in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected persons.
IV-62. The answer is E.   (Chap. 135)   Clostridia are gram-positive spore-forming obligate
anaerobes that reside normally in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Several clostridial speciescan cause severe disease.  C. perfringens, which is the second most common clostridial spe-
cies to normally colonize the GI tract, is associated with food poisoning, gas gangrene,and myonecrosis.  C. septicum  is seen often in conjunction with GI tumors.  C. sordellii is
associated with septic abortions. All can cause a fulminant overwhelming bacteremia, but
this condition is rare. The fact that this patient is well several days after his acute com-plaints rules out this fulminant course. A more common scenario is transient, self-limitedbacteremia due to transient gut translocation during an episode of gastroenteritis. There
is no need to treat when this occurs, and no further workup is necessary.  Clostridium spp.
sepsis rarely causes endocarditis because overwhelming disseminated intravascular coag-ulation and death occur so rapidly. Screening for GI tumor is warranted when C. septicum
is cultured from the blood or a deep wound infection.
IV-63. The answer is B.   (Chap. 210)   Ascaris lumbricoides  is the longest nematode (15–40 cm)
parasite of humans. It resides in tropical and subtropical regions. In the United States, itis found mostly in the rural Southeast. Transmission is through fecally contaminated soil.Most commonly the worm burden is low and it causes no symptoms. Clinical disease isrelated to larval migration to the lungs or to adult worms in the gastrointestinal tract.The most common complications occur due to a high gastrointestinal adult worm bur-den leading to small-bowel obstruction (most often in children with a narrow-calibersmall-bowel lumen) or migration leading to obstructive complications such as cholangi-tis, pancreatitis, or appendicitis. Rarely, adult worms can migrate to the esophagus and beorally expelled. During the lung phase of larval migration (9–12 days after egg ingestion)
patients may develop a nonproductive cough, fever, eosinophilia, and pleuritic chestpain. Eosinophilic pneumonia syndrome (Löfﬂer’s syndrome) is characterized by symp-
toms and lung inﬁltrates. Meningitis is not a known complication of ascariasis but can
occur with disseminated strongyloidiasis in an immunocompromised host.
IV-64. The answer is A.   (Chap. 144)   H. pylori is a disease of overcrowding. Transmission has
therefore decreased in the United States as the standard of living has increased. It is pred-icated that the percentage of duodenal ulcers due to factors other than H. pylori  (e.g., use
of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs) will increase over the upcoming decades. Con-troversial, but increasing, evidence suggests that H. pylori  colonization may provide some
protection from recent emerging gastrointestinal disorders, such as gastroesophageal re-
ﬂux disease (and its complication, esophageal carcinoma). Therefore, the health implica-tions of H. pylori eradication may not be simple.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 145
IV-65. The answer is D.   (Chap. 132)   Listeria  meningitis typically affects the elderly and the
chronically ill. It is frequently a more subacute (developing over days) illness than other
etiologies of bacterial meningitis. It may be mistaken for aseptic meningitis. Meningeal
signs, including nuchal rigidity, are less common, as is photophobia, than in other, moreacute causes of bacterial meningitis. Typically WBC counts in the CSF range from 100–5000/µL with a less pronounced neutrophilia. 75% of patients will have a WBC count<1000/µL. Gram’s stain is only positive in 30–40% of cases. Case fatality rates are ~20%.
IV-66. The answer is E.   (Chap. 123)   Clindamycin, ampicillin, and cephalosporins (including
ceftriaxone) were the ﬁrst antibiotics associated with C. difﬁcile –associated disease, and
still are. More recently, broad-spectrum ﬂuoroquinolones, including moxiﬂoxacin andciproﬂoxacin, have been associated with outbreaks of C. difﬁcile , including outbreaks in
some locations of a more virulent strain that has caused severe disease among elderlyoutpatients. For unclear reasons, β-lactams other than the later generation cephalospor-
ins appear to carry a lesser risk of disease. Penicillin/ β-lactamase combination antibiotics
appear to have lower risk of C.difﬁcile –associated disease than the other agents men-
tioned. Cases have even been reported associated with metronidazole and vancomycinadministration. Nevertheless, all patients initiating antibiotics should be warned to seekcare if they develop diarrhea that is severe or persists for more than a day, as all antibi-otics carry some risk for C. difﬁcile –associated disease.
IV-67. The answer is C.   (Chap. 181)   HTLV-I is a retrovirus that is a chronic infection like
HIV , but it does not cause similar sequelae. It was the ﬁrst identiﬁed human retrovirus.
Gradual decline of CD4+ lymphocyte number and function is a feature of HIV but not ofHTLV-I. While many people in endemic areas have serologic evidence of infection, most
do not develop disease. The two major complications of HTLV-I are tropical spastic para-paresis and acute T cell leukemia. Tropical spastic paraparesis is an upper motor neurondisease of insidious onset leading to weakness, lower extremity stiffness, urinary inconti-nence, and eventually a thoracic myelopathy, leading to a bedridden state in about a thirdof patients after 10 years. It is more common in women than men. It can easily be con-
fused with multiple sclerosis; this is why it is important to be able to recall the geographicregions where HTLV-I is endemic when evaluating a myelopathy. Acute T cell leukemia isa difﬁcult-to-treat leukemia that is speciﬁc to chronic HTLV-I infection. HTLV-I is
thought to be transmitted in a similar fashion to HIV .
IV-68. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 191 and 197)    The most common infection in a patient with
prolonged neutropenia and fever once acute bacterial infections have been ruled out isinvasive Aspergillosis  infection. Thoracic CT and serum galactomannan testing are indi-
cated because the initial stages of invasive disease are frequently not symptomatic. CTscan may show subtle new nodules or a halo sign (hemorrhagic infarction surrounding anodule) that is suggestive, though not diagnostic, of this condition.  Aspergillus  antigen is
detected by galactomannan release during growth of the mould. False positives are possi-ble for both chest CT and antigen testing. However, overdiagnosis is preferable to late or
missed diagnosis as this infection disseminates to the skin and brain and can be very dif-ﬁcult to treat at this stage. As a result, many cases are treated presumptively with serialchest CTs and galactomannan levels, rather than awaiting deﬁnitive diagnosis by culture
or consistent histopathology. Galactomannan levels may be falsely elevated in the pres-
ence of β-lactam/β-lactamase combination antibiotics such as piperacillin/tazobactam.Chest roentgenogram is not sensitive for detecting early disease. Bronchoscopy withbronchoalveolar lavage is indicated for an attempt at deﬁnitive diagnosis only if abnor-malities are detected on chest CT. There is no reason to suspect Clostridium difﬁcile  (and
hence the need for metronidazole) in the absence of diarrhea. Similarly, in the absence of
documented bacterial infection, there are no data to support the addition of an ami-noglycoside. There is no reason to suspect ﬂuconazole-resistant yeast infection requiringcaspofungin in the absence of detectable fungemia. While caspofungin has activityagainst Aspergillus , it is approved only for salvage therapy.
146 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
IV-69. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 129 and 131)   Probably because of its ubiquity and ability to
stick to foreign surfaces, S. epidermidis  is the most common cause of infections of central
nervous system shunts as well as an important cause of infections on artiﬁcial heart
valves and orthopedic prostheses. Corynebacterium  spp. (diphtheroids), just like S. epi-
dermidis , colonize the skin. When these organisms are isolated from cultures of shunts, it
is often difﬁcult to be sure if they are the cause of disease or simply contaminants. Leuko-cytosis in cerebrospinal ﬂuid, consistent isolation of the same organism, and the charac-ter of a patient's symptoms are all helpful in deciding whether treatment for infection isindicated.
IV-70. The answer is D.   (Chap. 209)   Visceral larva migrans, caused in this case by the canine
roundworm Toxocara canis , most commonly affects young children who are exposed to
canine stool. Toxocara  eggs are ingested and begin their life cycle in the small intestine.
They migrate to many tissues in the body. Particularly characteristic of this illness arehepatosplenomegaly and profound eosinophilia, at times close to 90% of the total whiteblood cell count. Staphylococci will not typically cause eosinophilia. Trichinellosis,caused by ingesting meat from carnivorous animals that has been infected with Trich-inella  cysts, does not cause hepatosplenomegaly and is uncommon without eating a sus-
picious meal. Giardiasis is characterized by profuse diarrhea and abdominal pain withoutsystemic features or eosinophilia. Cysticercosis typically causes myalgias and can spreadto the brain, where it is often asymptomatic but can lead to seizures.
IV-71. The answer is A.   (Chap. 179)   While most of the choices listed above can cause pharyn-
gitis in children, adenovirus classically presents with bilateral granular conjunctivitis aswell as pharyngitis, and is frequently the cause of an outbreak among children who are inclose contact with one another. Symptom-based and supportive therapies are indicatedfor all infections other than disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients.Rhinovirus infections manifest clinically as a common cold with sore throat and rhinor-rhea. Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a recently described respiratory pathogen.Infections usually occur in winter, and antibodies are present in most children by age 5.Clinically HMPV appears similar to human respiratory syncytial virus, with upper andlower respiratory symptoms. Serious infections may occur in immunocompromised pa-tients. Parainﬂuenza predominantly is a mild coldlike illness in older children and adults,presenting with hoarseness often without cough. Enteroviruses most frequently cause anacute undifferentiated febrile illness but may cause rhinitis, pharyngitis, and pneumonia.
IV-72. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 126 and 155)   This patient is chronically immunosuppressed
from his antirejection prophylactic regimen, which includes both glucocorticoids andazathioprine. However, the ﬁnding of a cavitary lesion on chest x-ray considerably nar-rows the possibilities and increases the likelihood of nocardial infection. The other clini-cal ﬁndings, including production of profuse thick sputum, fever, and constitutionalsymptoms, are also quite common in patients who have pulmonary nocardiosis. TheGram stain, which demonstrates ﬁlamentous branching gram-positive organisms, ischaracteristic. Most species of Nocardia  are acid-fast if a weak acid is used for decoloriza-
tion (e.g., modiﬁed Kinyoun method). These organisms can also be visualized by silverstaining. They grow slowly in culture, and the laboratory must be alerted to the possibil-ity of their presence on submitted specimens. Once the diagnosis, which may require aninvasive approach, is made, sulfonamides are the drugs of choice. Sulfadiazine orsulﬁsoxazole from 6–8 g/d in four divided doses generally is administered, but doses upto 12 g/d have been given. The combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim hasalso been used, as have the oral alternatives minocycline and ampicillin and IV amikacin.There is little experience with the newer β-lactam antibiotics, including the third-genera-
tion cephalosporins and imipenem. Erythromycin alone is not effective, although it hasbeen given successfully along with ampicillin. In addition to appropriate antibiotic ther-apy, the possibility of disseminated nocardiosis must be considered; sites include brain,skin, kidneys, bone, and muscle.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 147
IV-73.  and.  IV-74.   The answers are A and C.   (Chap. 156)   The most common site of actinomy-
cosis infection is the craniofacial area. Often the infection is associated with poor denti-
tion, facial trauma, or tooth extraction. Clinically this presents as a chronic cellulitis ofthe face, often with drainage through sinus tracts. The infection may spread without re-gard for tissue planes, and adjacent bony structures may be involved. Diagnosis requires ahigh degree of suspicion. The drainage is frequently contaminated with other organisms,especially gram-negative rods. The characteristic sulfur granules may not be seen unlessdeep tissue is sampled. On Gram’s stain, the characteristic appearance shows an intensegram-positive center and branching rods at the periphery. As opposed to the strictly aer-obic Nocardia  species, Actinomyces  grows slowly in anaerobic and microaerobic condi-
tions. Therapy requires a long course of antibiotics, even though the organism is verysensitive to penicillin therapy. This is presumed to be due to the difﬁculty of using antibi-otics to penetrate the thick-walled masses and sulfur granules. Current recommendationsare for penicillin IV for 2–6 weeks followed by oral therapy for a total of 6–12 months.Surgery should be reserved for patients who are not responsive to medical therapy.
IV-75. The answer is A.   (Chap. 197)   Aspergillus  has many clinical manifestations. Invasive as-
pergillosis typically occurs in immunocompromised patients and presents as rapidly pro-gressive pulmonary inﬁltrates. Infection progresses by direct extension across tissueplanes. Cavitation may occur. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a dif-ferent clinical entity. It often occurs in patients with preexisting asthma or cystic ﬁbrosis.It is characterized by an allergic reaction to Aspergillus  species. Clinically, it is character-
ized by intermittent wheezing, bilateral pulmonary inﬁltrates, brownish sputum, and pe-ripheral eosinophilia. IgE may be elevated, suggesting an allergic process, and a speciﬁcreaction to Aspergillus  species that is manifested by serum antibodies or skin testing is
common. Although central bronchiectasis is common in ABPA, the presence of periph-eral cavitary lung lesions is not a common feature.
IV-76. The answer is C.   (Chap. 123)   Interestingly, a number of recent studies have found that
colonization is not a risk factor for disease. This may be because strains that are apt tocolonize may provide some immunity to the host or are less toxigenic than disease-caus-ing strains. In either case, this serves as a reminder that stool testing should be conducted
only on symptomatic patients, as a positive test carries a totally different meaning if clin-ical suspicion for C.difﬁcile –associated disease is low. Patients should not be considered
to have C. difﬁcile –associated disease based on culture results alone. Additional informa-
tion to make a diagnosis in a patient with the appropriate clinical ﬁndings includes dem-onstrating presence of toxin A or B or demonstration of pseudomembranes atcolonoscopy. Risk factors for C. difﬁcile –associated disease are well deﬁned: the most im-
portant is antecedent antibiotics, especially ﬂuoroquinolones, cephalosporins, and clin-damycin. Age, high patient acuity, enteral feedings, antacids, and length of time in ahealth care facility are also predictive of developing C. difﬁcile –associated disease.
IV-77. The answer is D.   (Chap. 124)   Urethritis in men causes dysuria with or without dis-
charge, usually without frequency. The most common causes of urethritis in men includeN. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Ureaplasma urealyticum, Tricho-monas vaginalis,  herpes simplex virus, and possibly adenovirus. Until recently, C. tracho-
matis  accounted for 30–40% of cases; however, this number may be falling. Recent studies
suggest that M. genitalium is a common cause of non-chlamydial cases. Currently, the ini-
tial diagnosis of urethritis in men includes speciﬁc tests only for N. gonorrhoeae  and C.
trachomatis . T enets of urethral discharge treatment include providing treatment for the
most common causes of urethritis with the assumption that the patient may be lost to fol-low up. Therefore, prompt empirical treatment for gonorrhea and Chlamydia  infections
should be given on the day of presentation to the clinic. Azithromycin will also be effectiveforM. genitalium . If pus can be milked from the urethra, cultures should be sent for deﬁn-
itive diagnosis and to allow for contact tracing by the health department, as both of theabove are reportable diseases. Urine nucleic acid ampliﬁcation tests are an acceptable sub-stitute in the absence of pus. It is also critical to provide empirical treatment for at-risk
148 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
sexual contacts. If symptoms do not respond to the initial empirical therapy, patients
should be reevaluated for compliance with therapy, reexposure, and T. vaginalis  infection.
IV-78. The answer is E.   (Chap. 126)   Ultimately, solid organ transplant patients are at highest
risk for infection due to T cell immunodeﬁciency from antirejection medicines. As a re-sult, they are also at risk for reactivation of many of the viruses from the Herpes virusfamily, most notably CMV , varicella-zoster virus, and EBV . However, immediately after
transplant, these deﬁcits have not yet developed in full. Neutropenia is not common aftersolid organ transplantation as in bone marrow transplantation. In fact, patients are mostat risk of infections typical for all hospitalized patients, including wound infections, uri-nary tract infection, pneumonia, Clostridium difﬁcile  infection, and line-associated infec-
tion. Therefore, a standard evaluation of a febrile patient in the ﬁrst weeks after a solid
organ transplant should include a detailed physical examination, blood and urine cul-tures, urinalysis, chest radiography , C. difﬁcile  stool antigen/toxin studies if warranted, in
addition to a transplant-speciﬁc evaluation.
IV-79.  and.  IV-80.   The answers are E and A.   (Chaps. 130, 136, and 376)   In a previously healthy
student, particularly one living in a dormitory, Staphylococcus pneumoniae  and Neisseria
meningitides  are the pathogens most likely to be causing community-acquired bacterial
meningitis. As a result of the increasing prevalence of penicillin- and cephalosporin-resis-tant streptococci, initial empirical therapy should include a third- or fourth-generationcephalosporin plus vancomycin. Dexamethasone has been shown in children and adultsto decrease meningeal inﬂammation and unfavorable outcomes in acute bacterial menin-gitis. In a recent study of adults the effect on outcome was most notable in patients withS. pneumoniae  infection. The ﬁrst dose (10 mg IV) should be administered 15–20 min
before or with the ﬁrst dose of antibiotics and is unlikely to be of beneﬁt unless it is begun6 h after the initiation of antibiotics. Dexamethasone may decrease the penetration ofvancomycin into the CSF.
IV-81. The answer is C.   (Chap. 179)   While rhinovirus likely represents one of the most com-
mon viral illness in humans, human respiratory syncytial virus is the most prevalent res-piratory pathogen in young children and infants. Adenovirus is another common causeof the common cold and pharyngitis in children. Enteroviruses can cause an undifferen-tiated febrile illness and occasionally upper respiratory tract infections. Parainﬂuenza vi-ruses typically cause croup or tracheobronchitis among children.
IV-82. The answer is A.   (Chap. 132)   Listeria monocytogenes  causes GI illness via ingestion of
food that has been contaminated with high concentrations of bacteria. The bacteria maysurvive and multiply at refrigeration temperatures, therefore deli meats, soft cheeses, hotdogs, and milk are common sources. The attack rate is very high, with close to 100% ofexposed patients experiencing symptoms. Symptoms develop within 48 h of exposure,and there is no prolonged asymptomatic carrier state. Person-to-person spread (otherthan vertically from mother to fetus) does not appear to occur during outbreaks. Whilethe bacteria have several virulence factors that lead to clinical symptoms, the organism,and not a speciﬁc toxin, mediates infection. A large inoculum is necessary to producesymptoms. Surveillance studies show that <5% of asymptomatic adults have positivestool cultures, and fecal-oral spread is not common. Typical symptoms, including fever,are as described in the case above. Isolated GI illness does not require antibiotics.
IV-83. The answer is D.   (Chap. 120)   Neuropathic osteopathy, or Charcot’s foot, represents
characteristic destruction of the joints and bones of the foot in the setting of prolonged,poorly controlled diabetes mellitus. Characteristic chronic ﬁndings on physical examina-tion include hammer-toes and rocker bottom foot. More acutely the foot is often red andwarm, with bounding pulses followed by the initial joint deformities. This condition cantherefore be difﬁcult to differentiate from cellulitis, osteomyelitis, and deep tissue infec-tion, particularly in the presence of an ulcer. Unfortunately, all available imaging modali-ties can confuse osteomyelitis with the acute and chronic changes of neuropathicosteopathy as well. T o add to the challenge, the presence of a Charcot’s foot likely predis-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 149
poses to ulceration and subsequent contiguous osteomyelitis. Generally, MRI is adequate
for differentiating cellulitis and tumor; ultrasound can be useful for abscesses; MRI andplain ﬁlm all helpful for fractures. Appropriate samples for microbiologic studies shouldbe obtained to determine the presence and cause of chronic osteomyelitis.
IV-84. The answer is B.   (Chap. 184)   Enteroviruses are single-strand RNA viruses that multi-
ply in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract but rarely cause GI illness. Typical person-to-personspread occurs via the fecal-oral route; enteroviruses are not known to spread via bloodtransfusions or insect vectors. Infection is most common among infants and small chil-dren; serious illness occurs in neonates, older children, and adults. Most infections withpoliovirus are symptomatic or cause a minor illness. Prior to the implementation of poliovaccines, paralysis was a rare clinical presentation of poliovirus infection and was less fre-quent in developing countries, likely due to earlier exposure. Paralytic disease due to po-lio infection is more common in older adults, pregnant women, or persons exercisingstrenuously or with trauma at the time of central nervous system symptoms. Exposure tomaternal antibodies leads to lower risk of symptomatic neonatal infection.
IV-85. The answer is D.   (Chap. 124)   Genital human papilloma virus is thought to be the most
common sexually transmitted infection in the United States. A recent study of initially se-
ronegative college-aged women found 60% became infected within 5 years. This under-scores the importance of the recent development of effective vaccines and continuedcervical cancer screening strategies. Approximately 20–25% of the U.S. population past11–12 years old is seropositive for HSV-2. The high prevalence of this infection in the gen-eral population is due to several factors including lifelong infection, ongoing transmissionduring latent infection due to asymptomatic shedding of HSV-2 in the genital mucosa, andhigh rates of transmission within monogamous partnerships. These features are markedlydifferent than those associated with bacterial STIs such as gonorrhea and syphilis, whichrequire high rates of partner change to persist in subpopulations. HIV-1 infections are stillconcentrated within high-risk populations (men who sleep with men, injection drug users,high-risk heterosexuals, and immigrants from high prevalence regions).
IV-86. The answer is E.   (Chap. 210)   This patient’s most likely diagnosis is anisakiasis. This is a
nematode infection where humans are an accidental host. It occurs hours to days after in-gesting eggs that previously settled into the muscles of ﬁsh. The main risk factor for in-fection is eating raw ﬁsh. Presentation mimics an acute abdomen. History is critical as
upper endoscopy is both diagnostic and curative. The implicated nematodes burrow intothe mucosa of the stomach causing intense pain and must be manually removed by endo-scope or, on rare occasion, surgery. There is no medical agent known to cure anisakiasis.
IV-87. The answer is E.   (Chap. 203)   All febrile travelers returning from, or immigrants arriv-
ing from, Plasmodium falciparum –endemic regions should be assumed to have infection
with this most severe form of malaria until proven otherwise. P. falciparum  is the most
common infection in returning travelers, may be fatal if not treated, and none of thelisted features have sufﬁcient predictive value to rule out malaria. Splenomegaly is a com-mon feature of malaria but is not present in all cases.  P. v ivax  and P. ovale infections often
have paroxysmal fevers but not enough so as to carry signiﬁcant predictive value; this fea-ture is rarely present in P. falciparum –infected persons. Severe myalgias and retroorbital
headache often appropriately prompt interest in a diagnosis of dengue fever, but thesesymptoms are common in malaria as well. Abdominal pain is a very common feature ofmalaria, and diarrhea can also occur.
IV-88. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 126 and 175)   When the transplant donor is CMV IgG posi-
tive and recipient is negative, there is a very high risk of primary CMV infection in the re-cipient. However, if the recipient is IgG positive, CMV occurs as a reactivation infection.When both donor and recipient are seronegative, then the risk of any CMV infection islowest, but not zero, as a contact with an infected host could prompt primary CMV in-fection. Unlike nearly all other transplant patients, many donor and recipient seronega-tive patients do not receive chemoprophylaxis with ganciclovir. In patients who are CMV
150 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
IgG negative and received a CMV IgG negative transplant, transfusions should be from
CMV IgG negative donors or white blood cell ﬁltered products administered to reducethe risk of primary CMV infection.
IV-89. The answer is B.   (Chap. 121)   Microbiologic data are critical in establishing the source
of a liver abscess. Polymicrobial samples of pus or blood cultures with gram-negative rods,
enterococcus, and anaerobes suggest an abdominal or pelvic source. Hepatosplenic candi-
diasis once commonly occurred in leukemia or stem cell transplant patients not receivingantifungal prophylaxis. Fungemia was thought to develop in the portal vasculature with
poor clearance of yeast during neutropenia. The rejuvenation of neutrophils correlatedwith symptoms of hepatic abscess. Hepatosplenic candidiases is now quite rare, given thewidespread use of ﬂuconazole prophylaxis in patients with prolonged neutropenia. Cer-tain species such as Streptococcus milleri  or Staphylococcus aureus  likely indicate a primary
bacteremia and warrant a search for the source of this, depending on the typical ecologicniche of the organism isolated. Amebic abscesses should be considered in the context ofhost epidemiology: those with a low to medium pretest probability based on travel history,who also have a negative amebic serology, are effectively ruled out for disease, withoutneeding to sample the abscess percutaneously. Fever is the most common presenting signof liver abscess. Only 50% of patients with liver abscess have right upper quadrant pain,hepatomegaly, or jaundice. Therefore, half of patients may have no signs localizing to theliver. An elevated alkaline phosphatase level is the most sensitive laboratory ﬁnding in liverabscess, present in ~70% of cases. Other liver function abnormalities are less common.
IV-90. The answer is D.   (Chap. 196)   All patients with Candida  fungemia should be treated
with systemic antifungals. T erbinaﬁne is an agent used for dermatophyte infection of thefoot. Fluconazole has been shown to be an effective agent for candidemia with equiva-
lence to amphotericin products and caspofungin. For example, Candida glabrata  is typi-
cally resistant to ﬂuconazole. Voriconazole is also active against Candida albicans but hasmany drug interactions that make it less desirable against this pathogen. Azoles such asﬂuconazole and voriconazole are often less active against C. glabrata  and C. krusei . Many
practitioners therefore prefer to initiate treatment with caspofungin or amphotericinproducts in a patient with candidemia until the yeast isolate is deﬁnitively identiﬁed as C.
albicans. Caspofungin and other echinocandins are gaining popularity due to their broad
efﬁcacy against most yeast isolates and benign side-effect proﬁle. Amphotericin B is effec-tive in fungemia but frequently causes rigors, electrolyte wasting, and renal insufﬁciency.Newer lipid formulations mitigate these effects to varying extents.
I-91. The answer is C.   (Chap. 182)   Immune reconstitution syndrome (IRIS) is commonly
seen after the initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in patients with AIDS and a con-comitant opportunistic infection (OI). It is a syndrome where either a previously recog-nized OI worsens after ART despite an initial period of improvement after standardtherapy for that particular infection, or when an OI that was not previously recognized isunmasked after ART therapy. The latter scenario occurs presumably as immune cells be-come reactivated and recognize the presence of a pathogen that disseminated in the ab-sence of adequate T cell response with the patient remaining subclinical prior to ART.Many opportunistic pathogens are known to behave this way but Cryptococcus, Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis , and Mycobacterium avium  complex (MAI/MAC) are the most likely to
be associated with IRIS. Risk factors for IRIS are low CD4+ lymphocyte count at ART initi-
ation, initiation of ART within 2 months of treatment initiation for the OI, adequate viro-logic response to ART, and increase in CD4+ lymphocyte count as a result of ART. IRIS canbe diagnostically challenging and is very diverse in terms of clinical presentation and sever-ity. Depending on the organ system and pathogen involved, drug-resistant OI and new OI
must be considered, sometimes necessitating invasive biopsies and cultures. In this case,
the overlap of organ system with the original presentation, low likelihood of MAI drug re-sistance, and timing of the syndrome favor IRIS. Therapy is with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂam-
matory drugs and sometimes glucocorticoids. OI treatment is continued, and all efforts aremade to continue ART as well, except under the most dire of clinical circumstances.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 151
IV-92. The answer is E.   (Chap. 179)   Human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), previously
known as RSV , is an RNA paramyxovirus. HRSV is the major respiratory pathogen in
children, the foremost cause of lower respiratory illness in infants, and a cause of a com-mon cold–like syndrome. It is a common and important nosocomial pathogen. RSV Ig,also known as palivizumab , has been approved as a monthly injection for children <2
years old who have congenital heart or lung disease or who were born prematurely as ameans of preventing RSV infection. It has not been shown to be beneﬁcial in HRSV
pneumonia. Barrier precautions should be used, especially in locations where there arehigh transmission rates; however, with the advent of RSV Ig this is not the only means ofprevention. An inactivated, whole-virus RSV vaccine trial found that patients receivingthe vaccine appeared more likely to acquire RSV infection. An adequate vaccine has notbeen developed to date.
IV-93. The answer is C.   (Chap. 121)   Primary bacterial peritonitis is a complication of ascites
associated with cirrhosis. Clinical presentation can be misleading as only 80% of patients
have fever, and abdominal symptoms are only variably present. Therefore, when patientswith known cirrhosis develop worsening encephalopathy, fever, and/or malaise, the diag-nosis should strongly be considered and ruled out. In this case, a peritoneal polymorpho-nuclear leukocyte count of >250/ µL would be diagnostic of bacterial peritonitis even if
Gram’s stain were negative. The paracentesis also might provide microbiologic conﬁrma-tion. CT of the head would be useful for the diagnosis of cerebral edema associated with
severe hepatic encephalopathy or in the presence of focal neurologic ﬁndings suggestingan epidural bleed. Cirrhotic patients are at great risk of gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and
it may worsen hepatic encephalopathy by increasing the protein load in the colon. Esoph-agastroduodenoscopy would be a reasonable course of action, particularly if stools wereguaiac positive or there was gross evidence of hematemesis or melena. In this case, there
is no evidence of GI bleeding and there is mild hemoconcentration, possibly from perito-nitis. Lactulose, and possibly neomycin or rifaximin, is a logical therapeutic trial in thispatient if peritonitis is not present. Serum ammonia level may suggest hepatic encepha-lopathy, if elevated, but does not have sufﬁcient predictive value on its own to rule in orrule out this diagnosis.
IV-94. The answer is B.   (Chap. 189)   Since its introduction to the United States in 1999, West
Nile virus (WNV) causes ~1000–3000 cases of encephalitis with 300 deaths annually. It isa ﬂavivirus of the same family as the causative agents of St. Louis and Japanese encephali-tis. Cases typically occur in the summer, often in community outbreaks, associated withdead crows. It is estimated that 1% of infections cause encephalitis, with the remainderbeing subclinical or having self-limited West Nile fever. The elderly, diabetics, and pa-tients with prior central nervous system (CNS) disease are at greater risk of encephalitis.WNV cannot be cultured, and there is not yet a polymerase chain reaction test. IgM anti-bodies normally do not cross the blood-brain barrier, and so their presence in the CSF isdue to intrathecal production during acute infection with WNV . MRI is abnormal inonly 30% of cases of WNV , signiﬁcantly less often than is the case in herpes simplex virusencephalitis. Stool culture may be useful in the diagnostic evaluation of enteroviral men-ingitis or encephalitis but not in cases of WNV .
IV-95. The answer is B.   (Chap. 180)   Myositis and subsequent rhabdomyolysis and myoglo-
binuria represent a rare but severe complication of inﬂuenza infection. Renal failure mayoccur. Myalgias are a prominent symptom of inﬂuenza infection, but myositis character-ized by elevated creatine phosphokinase and marked tenderness of the muscles is very in-frequent. The pathogenesis of this complication is unknown. Other extrapulmonarycomplications of inﬂuenza including encephalitis, transverse myelitis, and Guillain-Barrésyndrome have been reported, although the etiologic relationship to inﬂuenza virus in-fection is uncertain. Myocarditis and pericarditis were reported during the 1918–1919 in-ﬂuenza pandemic. The most serious complication of inﬂuenza is secondary bacterialpneumonia, such as caused by Staphylococcus aureus . Arthritis, conjunctivitis, and ec-
zematous rashes have not been described as complications of inﬂuenza infection.
152 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
IV-96. The answer is C.   (Chap. 193)   Coccidioides immitis  is a mold that is found in the soil in
the southwestern United States and Mexico. Case clusters of primary disease may appear
10–14 days after exposure, and the activities with the highest risk include archaeologic ex-cavation, rock hunting, military maneuvers, and construction work. Only 40% of primarypulmonary infections are symptomatic. Symptoms may include those of a hypersensitivityreaction such as erythema nodosum, erythema multiforme, arthritis, or conjunctivitis. Di-agnosis can be made by culture of sputum; however, when this organism is suspected, thelaboratory needs to be notiﬁed as it is a biohazard level 3 fungus. Serologic tests of bloodmay also be helpful; however, seroconversion of primary disease may take up to 8 weeks.Skin testing is useful only for epidemiologic studies and is not done in clinical practice.
IV-97. The answer is C.   (Chap. 167)   Only two rickettsial infections, R. prowazekii  and C. bur-
netii , have a recrudescent or chronic stage. This patient has louse-borne (epidemic) ty-
phus caused by R. prowazekii. Louse-borne typhus occurs most commonly in outbreaks
in overcrowded, poorly hygienic areas such as refugee camps. There was an outbreak of~100,000 people living in refugee camps in Burundi in 1997. It is the second most severeform of rickettsial disease and can recur years after acute infection, as in this patient. Thisis thought to occur as a result of waning immunity. Rocky Mountain spotted fever wouldbe consistent with this patient’s presentation but he has no epidemiologic risk factors ap-parent for this disease. African tick-borne fever is considerably less severe and is often as-
sociated with a black eschar at the site of a tick bite. Murine typhus is usually less severe
and does not exist in a recrudescent form. Q fever can cause chronic disease but this is al-most always in the form of endocarditis.
IV-98. The answer is C.   (Chap. 122)   The patient most likely has food poisoning because of
contamination of the fried rice with Bacillus cereus.  This toxin-mediated disease occurs
when heat-resistant spores germinate after boiling. Frying before serving may not destroythe preformed toxin. The emetic form of illness occurs within 6 h of eating and is self-limited. No therapy is necessary unless the patient develops severe dehydration. This pa-tient currently has no symptoms consistent with volume depletion; therefore, she does notneed IV ﬂuids at present. Sarcoidosis does not predispose patients to infectious diseases.
IV-99. The answer is A.   (Chap. 166)   Lyme serology tests should be done only in patients with
an intermediate pretest probability of having Lyme disease. The presence of erythemamigrans in both patient B and patient E is diagnostic of Lyme disease in the correct epi-demiologic context. The diagnosis is entirely clinical. Patient C’s clinical course sounds
more consistent with systemic lupus erythematosus, and initial laboratory evaluationshould focus on this diagnosis. Patients with chronic fatigue, myalgias, and cognitivechange are occasionally concerned about Lyme disease as a potential etiology for theirsymptoms. However, the pretest probability of Lyme is low in these patients, assuming
the absence of antecedent erythema migrans, and a positive serology is unlikely to be atrue positive test. Lyme arthritis typically occurs months after the initial infection and oc-curs in ~60% of untreated patients. The typical attack is large joint, oligoarticular, andintermittent, lasting weeks at a time. Oligoarticular arthritis carries a broad differentialdiagnosis including sarcoidosis, spondyloarthropathy, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic ar-thritis, and Lyme disease. Lyme serology is appropriate in this situation. Patients with
Lyme arthritis usually have the highest IgG antibody responses seen in the infection.
IV-100. The answer is C.   (Chap. 120)   This patient has at minimum severe sepsis and has a very
high pretest probability of an epidural abscess compressing his spinal cord, based on thedevelopment of weakness and upper motor neuron signs. Both represent true emergen-cies. From a sepsis standpoint, the most likely organisms are gram-positive skin ﬂora
with methicillin-resistant or sensitive Staphylococcus aureus  representing a distinct possi-
bility. Vancomycin given intravenously is therefore imperative. However, other gram-negative organisms such as  Pseudomonas  and the HACEK organisms are sometimes
causes of bacteremia and endocarditis in injection drug users. Given this patient’s unsta-ble hemodynamic state, it would be sensible to empirically cover gram-negative rods aswell with cefepime. As the infection is life threatening, it would not be prudent to await
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 153
operative culture data prior to starting broad-spectrum antibiotics. An epidural abscess
needs to be diagnosed and surgically decompressed as rapidly as possible to prevent per-manent loss of neurologic function.
IV-101. The answer is A.   (Chap. 195)   Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis presents with early
manifestations of headache, nausea, gait disturbance, confusion, and visual changes. Fe-ver and nuchal rigidity are often mild or absent. Papilledema is present in ~30% of cases.Asymmetric cranial nerve palsies occur in 25% of cases. Neuroimaging is often normal. Ifthere are focal neurologic ﬁndings, an MRI may be used to diagnose cryptococcomas inthe basal ganglia or caudate nucleus, although they are more common in immunocom-petent patients with C. neoformans  var. gattii. Imaging does not make the diagnosis. The
deﬁnitive diagnosis remains CSF culture. However, capsular antigen testing in both theserum and the CSF is very sensitive and can provide a presumptive diagnosis. Approxi-mately 90% of patients, including all with a positive CSF smear, and the majority of AIDSpatients have detectable cryptococcal antigen. The result is often negative in patients withpulmonary disease. However, because of a very small false-positive rate in antigen testing,
CSF culture remains the deﬁnitive diagnostic test. In this condition C. neoformans  often
can also be cultured from the urine; however, other testing methods are more rapid anduseful.
IV-102. The answer is C.   (Chap. 124)   Acute epididymitis almost always causes unilateral pain-
ful swelling of the epididymis. In young men, epididymitis is usually an extension of a pri-mary sexually transmitted infection, and urethral discharge is therefore very suggestive ofthe diagnosis. The differential diagnosis includes testicular torsion, which is a surgicalemergency. An elevated testicle and lack of blood ﬂow on Doppler study suggest this diag-nosis. T esticular cancer, unlike epididymitis, does not usually cause tenderness and pain.This is an important consideration in any male with a testicular mass. Response to cefpo-doxime and doxycycline should suggest bacterial epididymitis, rather than rule it out.
IV-103. The answer is E.   (Chap. 116)   In recent years, rabies virus has been most frequently
transmitted by bats in the United States. Usually a bite is noted, but not always. There-
fore, patients who have unexpected, unmonitored (i.e., while they are asleep) close con-tact with bats should be told to seek medical attention and likely vaccination. A bite is a
clear indication for the most effective immunization strategy involving both active (inac-tivated virus vaccine) and passive (human rabies immunoglobulins) immune activation,unless the offending bat is captured and found to be rabies negative with further testing.The vaccination schedule for nonimmunes is intensive, with doses at 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28days. While there has been at least one report of successful antiviral treatment of rabies,
there is no indication for prophylactic antiviral therapy.
IV-104. The answer is A.   (Chap. 162)   This patient has syphilis of <1 year duration (early la-
tent). HIV counseling and testing are important for all patients diagnosed with syphilis,given the shared high-risk behaviors associated with transmission of both infections aswell as the increased risk of neurosyphilis in co-infected patients. Pregnancy status is im-portant to know as congenital syphilis is a concern. All recent sexual contacts should bescreened and treated empirically for syphilis, regardless of serologic or clinical status, asthe latency period between exposure and primary syphilis can last as long as 3 months.Individuals with syphilis are at high risk of other STDs such as chlamydia and gonorrhea.Syphilitic aortitis is not a concern in a patient with early latent syphilis.
IV-105. The answer is E.   (Chap. 182)   The biologic determinants of HIV transmission and ac-
quisition are complex and have been difﬁcult to study. However, several key factors arenow known to increase the per-coital rate of HIV transmission, at least for heterosexualcouples. In discordant couples there is a dose-dependent relationship between serum vi-
ral load and HIV transmission. In fact, in carefully done studies there was virtually no
transmission between discordant couples when serum viral load was low (<400/mL). It islikely that this is due to a fairly tight correlation between serum and genital viral load. Acorollary is that during acute HIV or AIDS, the viral load and, therefore, transmissibility
154 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
are high. There are strong clinical data from randomized trials that circumcised men are
less likely to acquire HIV because the interior surface of the foreskin is replete with cellu-lar targets for HIV infection. Nonulcerative sexually transmitted infections cause muco-sal breakdown that has been shown to allow for greater acquisition of HIV infection.HSV-2 carriage (not necessarily requiring active genital ulcer disease) leads to increasesin HIV genital shedding as well as HIV-1 target cell migration to the genital mucosa,making both transmission and acquisition of HIV higher in HSV-2-positive persons.
IV-106. The answer is E.   (Chap. 124)   Pelvic inﬂammatory disease refers to an ascending infec-
tion from the vagina/cervix to the endometrium and/or the fallopian tubes. Infectiouscomplications include peritonitis, perihepatitis, perisplenitis, or pelvic abscess. It is an im-portant cause of infertility.  Neisseria gonorrhoeae  and Chlamydia trachomatis are the mi-
crobes most commonly implicated in PID. Mycoplasma genitalium , anaerobes, and
facultative organisms have also been isolated in the peritoneal ﬂuid or fallopian tubes ofwomen with PID. Bacterial vaginosis, a history of salpingitis, the presence of an intrauter-ine device, or recent exposure to a male partner with urethritis are risk factors for the de-velopment of PID. PID is more likely to develop during or soon after a menstrual period,suggesting that menstruation is a risk for ascending infection from the cervix or vagina.
IV-107. The answer is B.   (Chap. 182)   CDC guidelines now state that all adults should receive
HIV testing, with the availability of a patient opt-out mechanism rather than informedconsent. The basis for this is that ~25% of the 1 million Americans infected with HIV areunaware of their status, there is good available treatment for HIV that serves to extendthe lifespan and decrease HIV transmission, and HIV testing is shown to correlate with adecrease in risk-taking behaviors. Cost-beneﬁt analysis has suggested this approach hasadvantages to current approaches focusing on screening high-risk populations. Pretestcounseling is desirable but not always built into the testing process so physicians shouldprovide some degree of preparation for a positive test. If the diagnosis is made, supportsystems should be activated that may include trained nurses, social workers, or commu-nity support centers.
IV-108. The answer is B.   (Chap. 132)   Listeria  bacteremia in pregnancy is a relatively rare but
serious infection both for mother and fetus. Vertical transmission may occur, with 70–90% of fetuses developing infection from the mother. Preterm labor is common. Prepar-tum treatment of the mother increases the chances of a healthy delivery. Mortality amongfetuses approaches 50% and is much lower in neonates receiving appropriate antibiotics.First-line therapy is with ampicillin, with gentamicin often added for synergy. This rec-ommendation is the same for mother and child. In patients with true penicillin allergy,the therapy of choice is trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Quinolones have shown animalmodel and in vitro efﬁcacy against Listeria , but there is not enough clinical evidence to
recommend these agents as ﬁrst-line therapy.
IV-109. The answer is A.   (Chap. 113)   The role of immune modulators in serious infections has
received increased attention in recent years as understanding of the cytokine and inﬂam-matory systems have evolved. In several models of disease, an aggressive host anti-inﬂam-matory response may increase organ damage. Steroids are useful adjuncts for severalinfections as antibiotics alone can increase inﬂammation and cytokine release due to lysisof intact organism and release of pro-inﬂammatory intracellular content. However, moldinfections, such as Aspergillus,  are apt to worsen in the setting of glucocorticoids.
IV-110. The answer is D.   (Chap. 188)   The patient has been bitten by a member of a species
known to carry rabies in an area in which rabies is endemic. Based on the animal vectorand the facts that the skin was broken and that saliva possibly containing the rabies viruswas present, postexposure rabies prophylaxis should be administered. If an animal in-volved in an unprovoked bite can be captured, it should be killed humanely and the headshould be sent immediately to an appropriate laboratory for rabies examination by thetechnique of ﬂuorescent antibody staining for viral antigen. If a healthy dog or cat bites aperson in an endemic area, the animal should be captured, conﬁned, and observed for 10
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 155
days. If the animal remains healthy for this period, the bite is highly unlikely to have
transmitted rabies. Postexposure prophylactic therapy includes vigorous cleaning of thewound with a 20% soap solution to remove any virus particles that may be present. T eta-nus toxoid and antibiotics should also be administered. Passive immunization with anti-rabies antiserum in the form of human rabies immune globulin (rather than thecorresponding equine antiserum because of the risk of serum sickness) is indicated at adose of 10 units/kg into the wound and 10 units/kg IM into the gluteal region. Second,one should actively immunize with an antirabies vaccine [either human diploid cell vac-cine or rabies vaccine absorbed (RV A)] in ﬁve 1-mL doses given IM, preferably in the del-toid or anterior lateral thigh area. The ﬁve doses are given over a 28-day period. Theadministration of either passive or active immunization without the other modality re-sults in a higher failure rate than does the combination therapy.
IV-111. The answer is D.   (Chap. 115)   Traumatic splenectomy does not necessarily result in loss
of splenic function as functioning splenules can implant within the peritoneum in thesetting of trauma. A peripheral smear showing Howell-Jolly bodies implies loss of splenicfunction. This is important as asplenic patients are at considerably higher risk of over-whelming sepsis and warrant vaccination against encapsulated pathogens.
IV-112. The answer is A.   (Chap. 118)   Patients with infective endocarditis on antibiotic therapy
can be expected to demonstrate clinical improvement within 5–7 days. Blood cultureswill frequently remain positive for 3–5 days for Staphylococcus aureus  treated with β-
lactam antibiotics and 7–9 days with vancomycin. Neither rifampin nor gentamicin hasbeen shown to provide clinical beneﬁt in the scenario described above. Vancomycin peakand trough levels have not been shown to improve drug efﬁcacy in infective endocarditis.It is too early in therapy to consider this case representative of vancomycin failure. The
efﬁcacy of daptomycin or linezolid as an alternative to vancomycin for left-sided MRSAendocarditis has not been established.
IV-113. The answer is B.   (Chap. 171)   Foscarnet is a potent agent used for drug-resistant CMV ,
herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV), or for patients who are in-tolerant of ﬁrst-line agents. It may cause acute renal failure. It also binds divalent metals,commonly causing hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperphos-phatemia. It is often poorly tolerated as a result of nausea and malaise as well. Ganciclovir
commonly causes bone marrow suppression and potential signiﬁcant neutropenia whenused for CMV infections, necessitating a switch to foscarnet. Foscarnet commonly causesrenal failure. Acyclovir (used for HSV and VZV) is generally very well tolerated but maycause lethargy and tremors. Aerosolized ribavirin is used to treat respiratory syncytial vi-rus infection in infants. It is a mutagen and teratogen and is embryotoxic.
IV-114. The answer is A.   (Chap. 182)   This patient most likely has HIV encephalopathy of
moderate severity. Other neurologic conditions associated with HIV may be consideredwith a broad initial workup, but her reasonably high CD4+ count, lack of focal deﬁcitsand lack of mass lesions on high-resolution brain imaging makes toxoplasmosis, centralnervous system (CNS) tuberculoma, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML),or CNS lymphoma all less unlikely. Immediate highly active antiretroviral therapy is thetreatment of choice for HIV encephalopathy, and she warrants this despite her CD4+lymphocyte count placing her in a gray zone according to current guidelines in regards tostarting therapy. A lumbar puncture looking for VDRL is unnecessary as a serum RPRtest is a very good screening test for any type of syphilis; JC virus detected in the CSFwould suggest PML, but her pretest probability for this is low because it usually affectspatients with a low CD4+ T cell count. Serum cryptococcal antigen has excellent perfor-
mance characteristics, but there is little reason to suspect cryptococcal meningitis in theabsence of headache or elevated intracerebral pressure.
IV-115. The answer is C.   (Chap. 196)   Candidemia  may lead to seeding of other organs. Among
nonneutropenic patients up to 10% develop retinal lesions; therefore, it is very importantto perform thorough funduscopy. Focal seeding can occur within 2 weeks of the onset of
156 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
candidemia and may occur even if the patient is afebrile or the infection clears. The lesions
may be unilateral or bilateral and are typically small white retinal exudates. However, retinalinfection may progress to retinal detachment, vitreous abscess, or extension into the ante-rior chamber of the eye. Patients may be asymptomatic initially but may also report blur-ring, ocular pain, or scotoma. Abdominal abscess are possible but usually occur in patientsrecovering from profound neutropenia. Fungal endocarditis is also possible but is morecommon in patients who use IV drugs and may have a murmur on cardiac examination.Fungal pneumonia and pulmonary abscesses are very rare and are not likely in this patient.
IV-116. The answer is C.   (Chap. 162)   This patient has failed therapy for syphilis as his RPR ti-
ter has not decreased fourfold over the course of a year. The FTA-ABS may remain posi-tive even after effective treatment. There is no indication for penicillin desensitization. Alumbar puncture is indicated when there is not a fourfold decrease in RPR titre 6–12months after appropriate therapy, particularly in patients with HIV . A lumbar punctureshowing pleocytosis, elevated protein, and/or a positive VDRL will conﬁrm the diagnosisand the need for 10–14 days of IV penicillin. If the CSF is negative, re-treatment with
three doses of IM penicillin for late latent syphilis is adequate. There is no reason to begintreatment for neurosyphilis until the diagnosis is made. Doxycycline, 100 mg PO bid for30 days, is an alternative treatment for syphilis of unknown duration or >1 year duration,but not for neurosyphilis.
IV-117. The answer is C.   (Chap. 153)   Although the patient’s gardening puts her at risk for
Sporothrix  infection, this infection typically causes a more localized streaking nodular
lymphadenitis affecting the forearm. The differential diagnosis for nodular adenitis in-
cludes Sporothrix schenckii ,Nocardia brasiliensis ,Mycobacterium marinum ,Leishmania
braziliensis , and Francisella tularensis and is based on direct inoculation of organism due
to contact from the soil, marine environment, insect bite, or animal bite. This patient hasregional lymphadenitis involving larger lymph nodes that drain the site of inoculation.Most likely in her case is cat scratch disease due to Bartonella henselae, based on the kit-
tens in her home, but lymphoma and staphylococcal infection must also be consideredand oftentimes a lymph node biopsy is required to make this distinction. Most cases ofcat scratch disease resolve without therapy. In immunocompetent patients, antibiotic
therapy has minimal beneﬁt but may expedite resolution of lymphadenopathy. Antimi-crobial therapy, usually with azithromycin, is indicated in immunosuppressed patients.
IV-118. The answer is B.   (Chap. 212)   Schistosoma mansoni  infection of the liver causes cirrho-
sis from vascular obstruction resulting from periportal ﬁbrosis but relatively little hepa-tocellular injury. Hepatosplenomegaly, hypersplenism, and esophageal varices developquite commonly, and schistosomiasis is usually associated with eosinophilia. Spider nevi,gynecomastia, jaundice, and ascites are observed less commonly than they are in alco-holic and postnecrotic ﬁbrosis.
IV-119. The answer is A.   (Chap. 148)   Campylobacters are motile, curved gram-negative rods.
The principal diarrheal pathogen is C. jejuni . This organism is found in the gastrointesti-
nal tract of many animals used for food production and is usually transmitted to humansin raw or undercooked food products or through direct contact with infected animals.Over half the cases are due to insufﬁciently cooked contaminated poultry. Campylobacter
is a common cause of diarrheal disease in the United States. The illness usually occurswithin 2–4 days after exposure to the organism in food or water. Biopsy of an affected pa-tient's jejunum, ileum, or colon reveals ﬁndings indistinguishable from those of Crohn'sdisease and ulcerative colitis. Although the diarrheal illness is usually self-limited, it maybe associated with constitutional symptoms, lasts more than 1 week, and recurs in 5–10%of untreated patients. Complications include pancreatitis, cystitis, arthritis, meningitis,and Guillain-Barré syndrome. The symptoms of Campylobacter  enteritis are similar to
those resulting from infection with Salmonella, Shigella , and Yersinia ; all these agents
cause fever and the presence of fecal leukocytes. The diagnosis is made by isolatingCampylobacter  from the stool, which requires selective media. E. coli (enterotoxigenic)
generally is not associated with the ﬁnding of fecal leukocytes; nor is the Norwalk agent.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 157
Campylobacter  is a far more common cause of a recurrent relapsing diarrheal illness that
could be pathologically confused with inﬂammatory bowel disease than are Yersinia, Sal-
monella, Shigella , and enteropathogenic E. coli .
IV-120. The answer is E.   (Chap. 113)   Deﬁciencies in the complement system predispose pa-
tients to a variety of infections. Most of these deﬁcits are congenital. Patients with sickle
cell disease have acquired functional defects in the alternative complement pathway. They
are at risk of infection from S. pneumoniae andSalmonella spp. Patients with liver disease,
nephrotic syndrome, and systemic lupus erythematosus may have defects in C3. They areat particular risk for infections with Staphylococcus aureus, S. pneumoniae, Pseudomonas
spp, and  Proteus spp. Patients with congenital or acquired (usually systemic lupus erythe-
matosus) deﬁciencies in the terminal complement cascade (C5-8) are at particular risk ofinfection from Neisseria spp such as N. meningitis  or N. gonorrhoeae .
IV-121. The answer is D.   (Chap. 166)   This patient’s rash is a classic erythema migrans lesion
and is diagnostic for Lyme disease in her geographic region. In the United States, Lymedisease is due to Borrelia burgdorferi. Partial central clearing, a bright red border, and a
target center are very suggestive of this lesion. The fact that multiple lesions exist impliesdisseminated infection, rather than a primary tick bite inoculation where only one lesionis present. Potential complications of secondary Lyme disease in the United States include
migratory arthritis, meningitis, cranial neuritis, mononeuritis multiplex, myelitis, vary-ing degrees of atrioventricular block, and, less commonly myopericarditis, splenomegaly,and hepatitis. Third-degree or persistent Lyme disease is associated with oligoarticular
arthritis of large joints and subtle encephalopathy but not frank dementia.  Borrelia gari-
nii infection is seen only in Europe and can cause a more pronounced encephalomyelitis.
IV-122. The answer is D.   (Chap. 166)   As shown in Figure IV-121 (Color Atlas), acute Lyme
disease involving the skin and/or joints is treated with oral doxycycline unless the patientis pregnant or <9 years old. Amoxicillin and macrolides (azithromycin) are less effective
therapies. Ceftriaxone is indicated for acute disease in the presence of nervous system in-volvement (meningitis, facial palsy, encephalopathy, radiculoneuritis) or third-degreeheart block. It may also be used for treatment of patients with arthritis who do not re-
spond to oral therapy. First-generation cephalosporins are not active against B. burgdor-
feri. While the rash of erythema migrans may look like cellulitis due to staphylococci or
streptococci, there is no proven efﬁcacy of vancomycin for Lyme disease.
IV-123. The answer is D.   (Chap. 118)   Culture-proven fungal (particularly mold) endocarditis
and sinus of Valsalva abscess represent situations where strong evidence supports cardiacsurgery; a ruptured sinus of Valsalva abscess represents a surgical emergency, while fungalendocarditis is usually considered more of an elective case, with earlier surgical managementpreferred. Acute aortic regurgitation plus preclosure of the mitral valve is also an indicationfor immediate surgery. Septic pulmonary emboli alone do not necessitate surgery; however,if a 10-mm vegetation is also seen this would best be treated surgically. Staphylococcal pros-thetic valve endocarditis (PVE) or PVE within 2 months of surgery is an example of reason-able indications for surgical management. In contrast to fungal endocarditis, there are noparticular species of bacteria that merit surgical treatment, independent of other factors.
IV-124. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 126 and 207)   T. gondii  commonly achieves latency in cysts
during acute infection. Reactivation in the central nervous system in AIDS patients is wellknown. However, Toxoplasma cysts also reside in the heart. Thus, transplanting a Toxo-
plasma -positive heart into a negative recipient may cause reactivation in the months after
transplant. Serologic screening of cardiac donors and recipients for T. gondii is impor-
tant. T o account for this possibility, prophylactic doses of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxa-zole, which is also effective prophylaxis against Pneumocystis and Nocardia , is standard
after cardiac transplantation. Cardiac transplant recipients, similar to all other solid or-gan transplant recipients, are at risk of developing infections related to impaired cellularimmunity, particularly >1 month to 1 year posttransplant. Wound infections or medias-tinitis from skin organisms may complicate the early transplant (<1 month) period.
158 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
IV-125. The answer is B.   (Chap. 123)   Severe C. difﬁcile –associated disease may mimic a surgi-
cal abdomen and patients may not have diarrhea. The lack of diarrhea should not over-
shadow the other signs and risk factors that are suggestive of C. difﬁcile –associated
disease, including signiﬁcant leukocytosis, long hospitalization, prior antibiotics, andprobable enteral tube feeds while on the ventilator. Adynamic ileus is a serious and well-
known complication of C. difﬁcile –associated disease. All potentially serious manifesta-
tions that could be C. difﬁcile –associated disease should be empirically treated as such
until stool antigen tests are negative and an alternative clinical explanation is found. In-travenous metronidazole may be less optimal then oral vancomycin for severe cases, andthis patient may fail therapy. However, oral medicines are less likely to reach the target or-
gan in the presence of an adynamic ileus, necessitating IV metronidazole. Some advocatecombining administration of oral vancomycin by NG tube with IV metronidazole. Allpotentially offending antibiotics should be stopped (if possible, as is the case here withthe patient having recovered from her pneumonia) rather than continued. Surgical colec-tomy may be necessary in fulminant cases when there is no response to medical therapy.Intravenous immunoglobulins, which may provide antibodies to C. difﬁcile  toxin, are re-
served for severe or multiple recurrent cases of C. difﬁcile –associated disease.
IV-126. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 143 and 282)   E .coli is the etiologic agent in 85–95% of uncom-
plicated urinary tract infections (UTIs) that occur in premenopausal women. Uncompli-cated cystitis is the most common UTI syndrome. 20% of women will develop a recurrencein 1 year after their initial UTI. Pregnant women are at high risk of cystitis developing intopyelonephritis.  Proteus  represents only 1–2% of uncomplicated UTI.  Proteus  causes 20–
45% of UTIs in patients with long-term bladder catheterization. Klebsiella  also accounts for
only 1–2% of uncomplicated UTIs; however, it is responsible for 5–17% of complicatedUTIs. Enterobacter  is a rare cause of infection outside of the hospital. Candida  is most often
a genitourinary colonizer in healthy patients and is rarely the cause of infection.
IV-127. The answer is D.   (Chap. 129)   This patient has infectious pyomyositis, a disease of the
tropics and of immunocompromised hosts such as patients with poorly controlled diabe-tes mellitus or AIDS. The pathogen is usually S. aureus . Management includes aggressive
debridement, antibiotics, and attempts to reverse the patient’s immunocompromised sta-tus. C. perfringens may cause gas gangrene, particularly in devitalized tissues. Streptococ-
cal infections may cause cellulitis or an aggressive fasciitis, but the presence of abscessesin a patient with poorly controlled diabetes makes staphylococcal infection more likely.Polymicrobial infections are common in diabetic ulcers, but in this case the imaging andphysical examination show intramuscular abscesses.
IV-128. The answer is C.   (Chap. 180)   Avian inﬂuenza epidemics occur when human inﬂuenza
A undergoes an antigenic exchange with inﬂuenza found in poultry. Recent outbreakshave not been associated with effective human-to-human spread; nearly all patients re-ported exposure to infected poultry. Past inﬂuenza pandemics, including the 1918–1919pandemic, appear to have originated from antigenic exchange between human and avianinﬂuenza viruses. Antigenic shifts are deﬁned as major changes in the hemagglutinin (H)and neuraminidase (N) antigens and occur only with inﬂuenza A. Minor antigenicchanges are known as antigenic drift and can occur with hemagglutinin alone or withboth hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N). While inﬂuenza A and B are geneticallyand morphologically similar, the latter virus’ inability to undergo antigenic shifts lessensits virulence and involvement in pandemic ﬂu. Inﬂuenza C is a rare cause of disease inhumans and is typically a clinically mild, self-limited infection.
IV-129. The answer is E.   (Chap. 193)   There is no Coccidioides in Northern Arizona (i.e., the Grand
Canyon region). The organism can be cultured from dry top soil in the high desert of South-
ern Arizona surrounding Phoenix and Tucson. Eosinophilia is a common laboratory ﬁndingin acute coccidioidomycosis and erythema nodosum is a common cutaneous clinical feature.
Mediastinal lymphadenopathy is more commonly seen on radiographs for all acute pneumo-nias due to endemic mycoses, including Coccidioides , rather than due to bacterial pneumonia.
A positive complement ﬁxation test is one method to deﬁnitively diagnose acute infection.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 159
IV-130. The answer is E.   (Chap. 166)   Post-Lyme syndrome is an uncommon but debilitating
syndrome similar to ﬁbromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome and sometimes occurs
after appropriate treatment for Lyme disease. Its etiology is not well understood, but it
does not appear to be due to ongoing replication or presence of Borrelia burgdorferi at
sites of patient discomfort. Clinical trials have compared long courses of IV ceftriaxone
followed by oral doxycycline with placebo and found no differences in patient outcome.Prednisone would be indicated only in the presence of documented inﬂammatory arthri-tis, a condition that is not evident in this patient. The patient has already received ade-quate treatment for Lyme disease, and a positive IgG serology would either indicate pastinfection or serofast state. In either case, the test is not indicated because this informationwould not be helpful in the current situation and could be misleading to the patient.
IV-131. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 145)   B. cepacia  is an opportunistic pathogen that has been re-
sponsible for nosocomial outbreaks. It also colonizes and infects the lower respiratorytract of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis, chronic granulomatous disease, and sickle cell dis-ease. In patients with cystic ﬁbrosis it portends a rapid decline in pulmonary functionand a poor clinical prognosis. It also may cause a resistant necrotizing pneumonia. B. ce-
pacia is often intrinsically resistant to a variety of antimicrobials, including many β-
lactams and aminoglycosides. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) is usuallythe ﬁrst-line treatment. P. aeruginosa and S. aureus  are common colonizers and patho-
gens in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia  is the pathogen, par-
ticularly in patients with cancer, transplants, and critical illness. S. maltophilia  is a cause
of pneumonia, urinary tract infection, wound infection, and bacteremia. TMP/SMX isusually the treatment of choice for Stenotrophomonas  infections.
IV-132. The answer is D.   (Chap. 121)   CAPD-associated peritonitis is different from primary
and secondary peritonitis in that most infections are caused by skin ﬂora rather than gutpathogens. Therefore, antibiotics should usually ultimately be directed towards Staphylo-
coccus species, especially S. aureus . These species, including coagulase-negative staphylo-
cocci, account for 40–50% of cases. Recently, S. aureus  has increased in frequency. Typical
signs include diffuse pain and peritoneal signs. Peritoneal ﬂuid will be cloudy with >100
WBCs/µL with >50% neutrophils. Vancomycin is necessary in areas where methicillin-
resistant S.aureus  is common. Intraperitoneal loading doses of this drug are typically
given. Though gram-negative and Candida  infections do occur and should be covered
prior to the return of culture data, they are less common. The presence of more than onespecies in culture should prompt an evaluation for secondary peritonitis. Once deﬁnitive
culture data are returned, then antibiotics can be narrowed towards only the offendingpathogen. If there is no symptomatic improvement within 48 h or the patient appearsseptic, then catheter removal is standard. These infections are in many ways similar tovascular catheter infections, and their management therefore has many parallels.
IV-133. The answer is D.   (Chap. 182)   Indinavir is the only agent to cause nephrolithiasis. Nu-
cleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, particularly stavudine and didanosine (d4T andddI), are associated with mitochondrial toxicity and pancreatitis. Nevirapine can causehepatic necrosis in women, particularly with a CD4+ lymphocyte count >350/ µL.
Efavirenz, a very commonly used agent, causes dream disturbances that usually, but notalways, subside after the ﬁrst month of therapy. Both indinavir and atazanavir cause a be-nign indirect hyperbilirubinemia reminiscent of Gilbert’s syndrome.
IV-134. The answer is E.   (Chap. 203)   Thick and thin smears are a critical part of the evaluation
of fever in a person with recent time spent in a Plasmodium -endemic region. Thick
smears take a longer time to process but increase sensitivity in the setting of low para-sitemia. Thin smears are more likely to allow for precise morphologic evaluation to dif-
ferentiate between the four different types of Plasmodium  infection and also allow for
prognostic calculation of parasitemia. If clinical suspicion is high, repeat smears shouldbe performed if initially negative. If personnel are not available to rapidly interpret asmear, empirical therapy should be strongly considered to ward off the most severe man-ifestation of P. falciparum  infection. Antibody-based diagnostic tests that are sensitive
160 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
and speciﬁc for P. falciparum infection have been introduced. They will remain positive
for weeks after infection and do not allow quantiﬁcation of parasitemia.
IV-135. The answer is B.   (Chap. 134).   This patient most likely has wound botulism. The use of
“black-tar” heroin has been identiﬁed as a risk factor for this form of botulism. Typically
the wound appears benign, and unlike in other forms of botulism, gastrointestinal symp-toms are absent. Symmetric descending  paralysis suggests botulism, as does cranial nerve
involvement. This patient’s ptosis, diplopia, dysarthria, dysphagia, lack of fevers, normal
reﬂexes, and lack of sensory deﬁcits are all suggestive. Botulism can be easily confused
with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), which is often characterized by an antecedent in-fection and rapid, symmetric ascending paralysis and treated with plasmapheresis. The
Miller Fischer variant of GBS is known for cranial nerve involvement with ophthal-moplegia, ataxia, and areﬂexia being the most prominent features. Elevated protein in the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid also favors GBS over botulism. Both botulism and GBS can progressto respiratory failure, so making a diagnosis by physical examination is critical. Other di-agnostic modalities that may be helpful are wound culture, serum assay for toxin, and ex-amination for decreased compound muscle action potentials on routine nervestimulation studies. Patients with botulism are at risk of respiratory failure due to respi-
ratory muscle weakness or aspiration. They should be followed closely with oxygen satu-
ration monitoring and serial measurement of forced vital capacity.
IV-136. The answer is D.   (Chap. 182)   Isospora  and Cryptosporidium  cause very similar clinical
disease in AIDS patients that ranges from intermittent, self-resolved watery diarrhea withabdominal cramping and sometimes nausea, to a potentially fatal cholera-like presenta-tion in the most immunocompromised hosts. Cryptosporidium may cause biliary disease
and can lead to cholangitis.  Isospora is limited to the gut lumen.  Cryptosporidium  is not
always an opportunistic infection and has led to widespread community outbreaks.  Isos-
pora  is not seen in immunocompetent hosts. Finally, treatment for Isospora is usually suc-
cessful. In fact, this infection is rarely seen in the developed world because trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, which is commonly used for Pneumocystis  prophylaxis, tends to eradi-
cate Isospora. Cryptosporidiosis, on the other hand, is very difﬁcult to cure and interven-
tions are controversial. Some clinicians favor nitazoxanone, but cure rates are mediocre
and immune reconstitution with antiretroviral therapy is ultimately critical to cure thegastrointestinal disease.
IV-137. The answer is F .   (Chap. 182)   Patients with HIV and a CD4+ lymphocyte count <200
µ/L are given the diagnosis of AIDS as this is a rough threshold for an increased risk forseveral life-threatening opportunistic infections. Different opportunistic infections and
HIV-related complications are seen most frequently below certain serum CD4+ lympho-cyte count thresholds: disseminated CMV / MAI (<50 µ/L), cryptococcosis (<100 µ/L)
and Pneumocystis  (<200 µ /L). These are all considered AIDS-deﬁning complications.
Certain diagnoses, such as active tuberculosis and Kaposi’s sarcoma, are consideredAIDS-deﬁning even though they may present with higher CD4+ lymphocyte counts be-cause they are historically linked with high mortality rates. Multidermatomal zoster startsto occur with more frequency when CD4+ lymphocyte count descends below 500 µ/L
and is not considered AIDS-deﬁning. If multidermatomal zoster occurs in a previouslyhealthy person, it should raise the suspicion of new HIV infection.
IV-138. The answer is D.   (Chap. 182)   Acute HIV should be suspected in any at-risk person
who presents with a mono-like illness: it is diagnosed by positive plasma RNA PCR. Pa-
tients typically have not developed sufﬁcient antibodies to the virus yet to develop a pos-itive EIA, and the diagnosis of HIV is usually missed if this test is sent within the ﬁrst 2months of HIV acquisition. It is tempting for clinicians to send an ultrasensitive PCR,but this only decreases speciﬁcity (false-positive tests with detection of very low levels ofHIV are possible due to cross contamination in the laboratory) with no other beneﬁt.There is typically a massive amount of HIV virus in the plasma during acute infection,and the ultrasensitive assay is never required for detection at this stage of disease. Ultra-sensitive assays are helpful in the context of therapy to ensure that there is not persistence
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 161
of low-level viremia. CD4+ lymphocyte count decreases during many acute infections,
including HIV , and is therefore not diagnostically appropriate. CD4+ lymphocyte countsare useful to risk stratify for opportunistic infection in stable patients with known HIVinfection. Resistance tests are sent only when the diagnosis is conﬁrmed.
IV-139. The answer is D.   (Chap. 160)   Congenital infection from maternal transmission can
lead to severe consequences for the neonate; thus, prenatal care and screening for infec-tion are very important. C. trachomatis  is associated with up to 25% of exposed neonates
who develop inclusion conjunctivitis. It can also be associated with pneumonia and otitismedia in the newborn. Pneumonia in the newborn has been associated with later devel-opment of bronchitis and asthma. Hydrocephalus can be associated with toxoplasmosis.Hutchinson triad, which is Hutchinson teeth (blunted upper incisors), interstitial kerati-tis, and eighth nerve deafness, is due to congenital syphilis. Sensorineural deafness can beassociated with congenital rubella exposure. Treatment of C. trachomatis  in the infant
consists of oral erythromycin.
IV-140. The answer is B.   (Chap. 182)   Suppression of HIV replication with combination ART is
the cornerstone of management of patients with HIV infection. There are several possiblestarting regimens for HIV therapy. T enofovir, emtricitabine, and efavirenz is a popular
combination as it is potent, reasonably free of side effects in the long term, and is avail-able in a single pill called Atripla. The combination of stavudine and didanosine (choiceA) is now strictly contraindicated as there is a synergistic effect of mitochondrial toxicityresulting in cases of pancreatitis, neuropathy, and lactic acidosis. Indinavir, an older pro-
tease inhibitor, has an unacceptably high toxicity (nephrolithiasis) and too frequent dos-ing (3 times per day) for the current standard of care for an initial regimen. Choice Dcontains two protease inhibitors (lopinavir/ritonavir, atazanavir), which is atypical andwould not be ﬁrst-line therapy. Choice E (AZT, 3TC, ABC) is available in a combinationtaken twice a day called Trizivir. It consists of three nucleoside analogues and has been as-
sociated with unacceptably high levels of treatment failure in clinical trials comparing itto current standard regimens.
IV-141. The answer is B.   (Chap. 176)   Molluscum contagiosum is a cutaneous poxvirus infec-
tion with a distinctive cutaneous appearance. The rash typically consists of collections of2- to 5-mm umbilicated papules that can occur anywhere on the body except  the palms
and soles. It can be accompanied by an eczematous reaction. Molluscum contagiosum istransmitted through close contact including sexual contact, which will cause genital in-volvement. Unlike other poxvirus lesions, molluscum contagiosum is not associated withinﬂammation or necrosis. In immunocompetent patients, the disease is usually self-limited; rash will subside within several months time. Systemic involvement does not occur.
IV-142. The answer is E.   (Chap. 182)   P. jiroveci  lung infection is known to worsen after initia-
tion of treatment, likely due to lysis of organism and immune response to its intracellularcontents. It is thought that adjunct administration of glucocorticoids may reduce inﬂam-mation and subsequent lung injury in patients with moderate to severe pneumonia dueto P. jiroveci. Adjunct administration of glucocorticoids in patients with moderate to se-
vere disease as determined by a room air Pa
O2 <70 mmHg or an A – a gradient >35
mmHg decrease mortality. Glucocorticoids should be given for a total duration of 3weeks. Patients often do not improve until many days into therapy and often initiallyworsen; steroids should be used as soon as hypoxemia develops rather than wait for lackof improvement. Pneumothoraces and adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) arecommon feared complications of Pneumocystis  infection. If patients present with ARDS
due to Pneumocystis  pneumonia, they would meet the criterion for adjunct glucocorti-
coids due to the severe nature of disease.
IV-143. The answer is A.   (Chap. 191)   Caspofungin and the other echinocandins (anidulafun-
gin, micafungin) inhibit fungal synthesis of B-1,3-glucan synthase, a necessary enzyme forfungal cell wall synthesis that does not have a human correlate. These agents are availableonly parentally, not orally. They are fungicidal for Candida  species and fungistatic against
162 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
Aspergillus  species. Caspofungin is as at least equivalently effective as amphotericin B for
disseminated candidiasis and is as effective as ﬂuconazole for candidal esophagitis. It is not
a ﬁrst-line therapy for Aspergillus  infection but may be used as salvage therapy. The echin-
ocandins, including caspofungin, have an extremely high safety proﬁle. They do not haveactivity against mucormycosis, paracoccidiomycosis, or histoplasmosis.
IV-144. The answer is D or F .   (Chap. 208)   Giardiasis is diagnosed by detection of parasite anti-
gens, cysts, or trophozoites in feces. There is no reliable serum test for this disease. As awide variety of pathogens are responsible for diarrheal illness, some degree of diagnostictesting beyond the history and physical examination is required for deﬁnitive diagnosis.Colonoscopy does not have a role in diagnosing Giardia . Giardiasis can persist in symp-
tomatic patients and should be treated. Cure rates with 5 days of oral metronidazole tidare >90%. A single oral dose of tinidazole is reportedly at least as effective as metronida-zole. Paromomycin, an oral poorly absorbed aminoglycoside, can be used for sympto-matic patients during pregnancy, but its efﬁcacy for eradicating infection is not known.Clindamycin and albendazole do not have a role in treatment of giardiasis. Refractorydisease can be treated with longer duration of metronidazole.
IV-145. The answer is B.   (Chap. 160)   Nontuberculous mycobacteria, such as M.avium  com-
plex, may cause chronic pulmonary infections in normal hosts and those with underlyingpulmonary disease immunosuppression. In immunocompetent patients without under-lying disease, treatment of pulmonary infection with M. avium  complex is considered on
an individual basis based on symptoms, radiographic ﬁndings, and bacteriology. Treat-ment should be initiated in the presence of progressive pulmonary disease or symptoms.In patients without any prior lung disease and who do not demonstrate progressive clini-cal decline, M.avium  pulmonary infection can be managed conservatively. Patients with
underlying lung disease, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cystic ﬁbrosis,or those with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis should receive antibiotics. In the vi-gnette above, the patient has both clinical and historic reasons for antibiotic treatment.The appropriate regimen in this case is clarithromycin and ethambutol. The combinationof pyrazinamide, isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol is effective treatment for M.tuber-
culosis  infection, which is not present here. Quinolones have shown promise in the treat-
ment of mycobacterial infections but are not ﬁrst-line therapy in this case. Rifampin hasno role in treating M. avium  infection.
IV-146. The answer is A.   (Chap. 191)   The deﬁnitive diagnosis of an invasive fungal infection
generally requires histologic demonstration of fungus invading tissue along with an in-ﬂammatory response. However, coccidioides serum complement ﬁxation, cryptococcalserum and cerebrospinal ﬂuid antigen, and urine/serum histoplasma antigen are all testswith good performance characteristics, occasionally allowing for presumptive diagnosesbefore pathologic tissue sections can be examined or cultures of blood or tissue turn pos-itive. There is no such widely used serologic test for blastomycosis. Serum testing for ga-lactomannan is approved for the diagnosis of Aspergillus  infection. However, false
negatives may occur, and further studies of the validity are necessary.
IV-147. The answer is B.   (Chap. 171)   Oral ribavirin combined with pegylated interferon ap-
pears to be the most effective regimen for treating hepatitis C. Ribavirin does not exert
antiviral effect but may be an immune modulator in combination with the interferon.Hemolytic anemia occurs in nearly 25% of patients receiving this therapy. Common ap-proaches to this problem are dose reduction, cessation of ribavirin therapy, or use of redcell growth factors. Rash can occur but is less common. Interferon has common side ef-fects as well, including ﬂulike symptoms, depression, sleep disturbances, personalitychange, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
IV-148. The answer is C.   (Chap. 116)   Hepatitis B is efﬁciently spread as a bloodborne patho-
gen. In approximately one-third of needle stick cases where the victim is not immunized(either by vaccine or prior clearance of infection), hepatitis B transmission will occur.This is in comparison to 3% for hepatitis C and 0.3% for HIV-1 infections. Moreover,
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 163
hepatitis B, because it is a DNA virus, can survive for prolonged amount of times on un-
sterilized surfaces. This speaks to the goal of 100% vaccination against hepatitis B for allhealth care workers. Rapid administration of both hepatitis B vaccine and immunoglob-ulins are the most effective way to prevent transmission if a high-risk stick occurs to anonimmune health care worker. No data exist to support the use of antiviral therapy forhepatitis B needle sticks, though this strategy has proven effective for HIV-1 associatedneedle sticks.
IV-149. The answer is C.   (Chap. 203)   Appropriately and promptly treated, P.falciparum  ma-
laria without complications has a mortality rate of ~0.1%. The presence or developmentof organ dysfunction elevates mortality risk signiﬁcantly. Hypoglycemia is associatedwith a poor prognosis and is most common in children and pregnant women. It is causedby a failure of hepatic gluconeogenesis and increased glucose consumption by the host.
Quinine and quinidine may also increase pancreatic insulin secretion. Obtundation and
coma are worrisome in that they often represent cerebral edema, a feared complication ofcerebral malaria. The mortality of cerebral malaria is 15–20%. Acute renal failure andprofound hemolytic anemia often accompany severe infection and are also poor prog-nostic features. Their presence may necessitate hemodialysis and exchange transfusion.Though liver enzyme elevations and hemolytic jaundice are common in malaria, hepaticnecrosis is not. When severe liver dysfunction occurs, it is usually in the context of multi-organ failure.
IV-150. The answer is C.   (Chap. 378)   Prions are infectious proteins that lack nucleic acids and
cause neurodegenerative diseases. The most common prion disease in humans is spo-radic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (s-CJD). Others include familial CJD, fatal familial in-somnia, kuru, and iatrogenic CJD. Prions result when an abnormal prion protein bindsto a normal isoform of the prion protein, stimulating its conversion into the abnormalisoform. Abnormal prion isoforms have a greater proportion of β-structure and less α-
helix than do normal isoforms. The α-to-β structural transition underlies the etiology of
the central nervous system degeneration. The patient described has a typical presentationof s-CJD with sleep disturbance, fatigue, and defects in higher cortical functions. CJDprogresses quickly to dementia. Over 90% of patients with CJD exhibit myoclonus dur-ing the illness. Typically the myoclonus is provoked by startle, loud noises, or brightlights and will occur even during sleep. The diagnosis requires an appropriate clinicalpresentation and no other etiologies on CSF examination. There is no widely availablelaboratory test for diagnosis. Brain biopsy may demonstrate spongiform degenerationand the presence of prion proteins.
IV-151. The answer is D.   (Chap. 168)   Mycoplasma pneumoniae  is a common cause of pneumo-
nia that is often underdiagnosed based on difﬁcult and time-consuming culture tech-niques, it likely causes mild respiratory symptoms, and because it is adequately treatedwith standard antibiotic regimens for community-acquired pneumonia. It is spread eas-ily person-to-person, and outbreaks in crowded conditions are common. Most patientsdevelop a cough without radiographic abnormalities. Pharyngitis, rhinitis, and ear pain
are also common.  M. pneumoniae  commonly induces the production of cold agglutinins,
which in turn can cause an IgM- and complement-mediated intravascular hemolyticanemia. The presence of cold agglutinins is speciﬁc for M. pneumoniae  infection only in
the context of a consistent clinical picture for infection, as in this patient. Cold aggluti-nins are more common in children. Blood smear shows no abnormality, which is in con-
trast to IgG or warm-type hemolytic anemia where spherocytes are seen. Since there is no
easy diagnostic test, empirical therapy is often administered.
IV-152. The answer is B.   (Chap. 120)   The most common overall cause of acute bacterial osteo-
myelitis of the spine is S. aureus , accounting for ~50% of cases due to a single organism,
introduced via the bloodstream in patients at risk for bloodstream infections (injectingdrug users, hemodialysis patients, open postoperative wounds). However, in older male
patients with lumbar osteomyelitis, genitourinary or enteric pathogens, such as E. coli,
are common, particularly after recent urinary tract infections and/or urologic surgeries,
164 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
accounting for up to 25% of cases of vertebral osteomyelitis. Pathogenesis may occur via
retrograde introduction of organism into the spine via the spinal venous plexus. Polymi-
crobial osteomyelitis is most often due to contiguous infection, such as a decubitus ulceror diabetic foot infection, rather than bloodstream introductions that are more typical inthe spine. Tuberculosis (Pott’s disease) is always a consideration for osteomyelitis of thespine. However, this patient’s presentation is likely too acute for tuberculosis, and the
thoracic spine is a slightly more typical location than the lumbar spine. Brucellosis com-monly involves the spine, but this patient’s potential exposure to Brucella  spp. is dated
and the course of the infection is too acute for brucellosis. Hypothetically each of thelisted infections is possible, highlighting the importance of holding antibiotics beforeculturing the epidural space, provided that the patient does not have sepsis on originalpresentation.
IV-153. The answer is A.   (Chap. 167)   Human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis occurs mostly
in the northeastern and upper midwestern United States. It shares the Ixodes tick vector
with Lyme disease. It is typically a disease of older males (median age 51 years). Becauseseroprevalence rates are high in endemic areas, subclinical infection is likely common.The disease typically presents with fever (>90% of cases), myalgias, headache, and mal-aise. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and elevated aminotransaminase activity is com-mon. Adult respiratory distress syndrome, toxic shock–like syndrome, and opportunisticinfections may occur, particularly in the elderly. Human granulocytotropic anaplasmosisshould be considered on the differential of a ﬂulike illness during May through Decemberin endemic regions. Morulae, intracytoplasmic inclusions, are seen in the neutrophils ofup to 80% of cases of human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis on peripheral blood smearand are diagnostic in the appropriate clinical context. This patient has high epidemio-logic risk based on his long periods of time outside in an endemic region. Human mono-cytotropic ehrlichiosis, which can be a more severe illness, has morulae in mononuclearcells (not neutrophils) in a minority of cases. Lyme disease, which may be difﬁcult to dis-tinguish from human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis or human monocytotropicehrlichiosis, will not cause morulae. Treatment of human granulocytotropic anaplasmo-
sis is with doxycycline.
IV-154. The answer is E.   (Chap. 197)    Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is not a
true infection but rather a hypersensitivity immune response to colonizing Aspergillus
species. It occurs in ~1% of patients with asthma and in up to 15% of patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis. Patients typically have wheezing that is difﬁcult to control with usual agents, in-ﬁltrates on chest radiographs due to mucus plugging of airways, a productive cough oftenwith mucus casts, and bronchiectasis. Eosinophilia is common if glucocorticoids havenot been administered. The total IgE is of value if >1000 IU/mL in that it represents a sig-niﬁcant allergic response and is very suggestive of ABPA. In the proper clinical context, apositive skin test for Aspergillus  antigen or detection of serum Aspergillus -speciﬁc IgG or
IgE precipitating antibodies are supportive of the diagnosis. Galactomannan EIA is usefulfor invasive aspergillosis but has not been validated for ABPA. There is no need to try toculture an organism via BAL to make the diagnosis of ABPA. Chest CT, which may reveal
bronchiectasis, or pulmonary function testing, which will reveal an obstructive defect,will not be diagnostic.
IV-155. The answer is B.   (Chap. 118)   Prosthetic cardiac valves are at high risk of developing
endocarditis after bacteremia. Patients who develop endocarditis within 2 months ofvalve surgery most likely have acquired their infection nosocomially as a result of intra-operative contamination of the prosthesis or of a bacteremic postoperative event. Coagu-lase-negative staphylococci are the most common (33%) nosocomial pathogens duringthis time frame, followed by Staphylococcus aureus  (22%), facultative gram-negative ba-
cilli (13%), enterococci (8%), diphtheroids (6%), and fungi (6%) (see Table IV-155). Themodes of infection and typical organisms causing prosthetic valve endocarditis >12months after surgery are similar to those in community-acquired endocarditis. Both setsof pathogens must be considered in the intermediate 2–12 months after surgery.
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 165
IV-156. The answer is C.   (Chap. 182)   Clindamycin plus primaquine is a therapeutic, not pro-
phylactic, regimen for mild to moderate disease due to Pneumocystis  infection. Trimetho-
prim/sulfamethoxazole is usually given as a ﬁrst-line agent but carries a signiﬁcant side-
effect proﬁle including hyperkalemia, renal insufﬁciency, elevation of serum creatinine,granulocytopenia, hemolysis in persons with G6PD insufﬁciency, and frequent allergicreactions, particularly in those with severe T cell deﬁciency. Atovaquone is a common al-ternative that is given at the same dose for Pneumocystis prophylaxis as for therapy. Gas-
trointestinal symptoms are common with atovaquone. Aerosolized pentamidine can begiven on a monthly basis with a risk of bronchospasm and pancreatitis. Patients who de-velop Pneumocystis  pneumonia while receiving aerosolized pentamidine often have up-
per lobe–predominant disease. Dapsone is commonly used for Pneumocystis prophylaxis;
however, the physician must be aware of the possibility of methemoglobinemia, G6PD-mediated hemolysis, rare hepatotoxicity, and rare hypersensitivity reaction when usingthis medicine.
IV-157. The answer is E.   (Chap. 124)   All of the listed bacterial STIs have had an impressive re-
surgence among homosexual men in North America and Europe since 1996. This is in
part due to the phenomena of serosorting, an imperfect process among many homosex-ual men who seek sexual partners of the same HIV serostatus. This method allows for no
protection against other STIs, and in fact may allow for concentration of these infectionsamong high-risk networks of men. HIV prevalence has unfortunately also increased
among homosexual men. Lymphogranuloma venereum, an uncommon chlamydial in-fection that had virtually disappeared prior to the AIDS era, has been reported in out-breaks amongst homosexual men.
IV-158. The answer is B.   (Chap. 182)   Oral hairy leukoplakia is due to severe overgrowth of Ep-
stein-Barr virus infection in T cell–deﬁcient patients. It is not premalignant, is often un-TABLE IV-155 Organisms Causing Major Clinical Forms of Endocarditis
Percent of Cases
Native Valve EndocarditisProsthetic Valve Endocar-
ditis at Indicated Time of Onset (Months) after Valve Surgery Endocarditis in Injection Drug Users
OrganismCommunity-Acquired(n= 683)Health Care–Associated(n= 128)< 2 (n=
144)2–12(n = 
31)> 12 (n=
194)Right-Sided (n= 346)Left-Sided (n = 204)T otal (n= 675)
a
Streptococcib32   8   1   9 31   5 15 12
Pneumococci   1 — — — — — — —
Enterococci   8 16   8 12 11   2 24   9
Staphylococcus aureus 35 44c22 12 18 77 23 57
Coagulase-negative 
staphylococci  4 1 5 3 33 21 1 — — —
Fastidious gram-
negative coccobacilli 
(HACEK group)d  3 — ——  6 — — —
Gram-negative bacilli   3   5 13   3   6   5 13   7
Candida  spp.   1   6   8 12   1 — 12   4
Polymicrobial/
miscellaneous  6   1   3   6   5   8 10   7
Diphtheroids — —   6 —   3 — —   0.1
Culture-negative   5   5   5   6   8   3   3   3
aThe total number of cases is larger than the sum of right- and left-sided cases because the location of infection was not speci ﬁed in some cases.
bIncludes viridans streptococci; Streptococcus bovis ; other non–group A, groupable streptococci; and Abiotrophia  spp. (nutritionally variant,
pyridoxal-requiring streptococci).
cMethicillin resistance is common among these S. aureus  strains.
dIncludes Haemophilus  spp., Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans ,Cardiobacterium hominis ,Eikenella spp., and Kingella  spp.
Note:  Data are compiled from multiple studies.
166 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
recognized by the patient, but is sometimes a cosmetic, symptomatic, and therapeutic
nuisance. The white thickened folds on the side of the tongue can be pruritic or painfuland sometimes resolve with acyclovir derivatives or topical podophyllin resin. Ultimateresolution occurs after immune reconstitution with antiretroviral therapy. Oral candidia-sis or thrush is a very common, relatively easy-to-treat condition in HIV patients and takeson an appearance of white plaques on the tongue, palate, and buccal mucosa that bleedwith blunt removal. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) recurrences or aphthous ulcers presentas painful ulcerating lesions. The latter should be considered when oral ulcers persist, donot respond to acyclovir, and do not culture HSV . Kaposi’s sarcoma is uncommon in theoropharynx and takes on a violet hue, suggesting its highly vascularized content.
IV-159. The answer is A.   (Chap. 160)   Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) were originally
classiﬁed into “fast-growers” and “slow-growers” based on the length of time they took togrow in culture. While more sophisticated tests have been developed, this classiﬁcationscheme is still used and is of some beneﬁt to the clinician. Fast-growing NTM include M.
abscessus, M.fortuitum, and M.chelonae . They will typically take 7 days or less to grow on
standard media, allowing relatively fast identiﬁcation and drug-resistance testing. Slow-growing NTM include M.avium ,M.marinum ,M.ulcerans , and M. kansasii . They often
require special growth media and therefore a high pretest suspicion. The patient de-scribed above likely has a cutaneous infection from one of the “fast-growing” NTM,which could be diagnosed with tissue biopsy, Gram stain, and culture.
IV-160. The answer is D.   (Chap. 205)   This patient comes from an area endemic for visceral
leishmaniasis that includes Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Sudan, and Brazil. Although manyspecies can cause cutaneous or mucosal disease, the L. donovani  complex generally is as-
sociated with visceral leishmaniasis. The organism is transmitted by the bite of the sand-ﬂy in the majority of cases. Although many patients remain asymptomatic, malnourishedpersons are at particular risk for progression to symptomatic disease or kala azar, the life-threatening form. The presentation of this disease generally includes fever, cachexia, andsplenomegaly. Hepatomegaly is rare compared with other tropical diseases associatedwith organomegaly, such as malaria, miliary tuberculosis, and schistosomiasis. Pancy-topenia is associated with severe disease, as are hypergammaglobulinemia and hypoalbu-minemia. Although active investigation is under way to determine a means of diagnosingleishmaniasis by molecular techniques, the current standard remains demonstration ofthe organism on a stained slide or in tissue culture of a biopsy specimen. Splenic aspira-tion has the highest yield, with reported sensitivity of 98%. In light of the high mortalityassociated with this disease, treatment should not be delayed. The mainstay of therapy isa pentavalent antimonial, but newer therapies including amphotericin and pentamidinecan be indicated in certain situations. In this case it would be prudent to rule out malariawith a thick and a thin smear. Rarely, the intracellular amastigote forms of Leishmania
spp. can be seen on a peripheral smear.
IV-161. The answer is C.   (Chap. 182)   HIV resistance testing is recommended in selecting ini-
tial ART where the prevalence of resistance is high (such as in the United States or Eu-rope) and in determining new therapy for patients with virologic failure while on ART. Inthe United States, the predominant virus in up to 12% of new cases has one major geno-typic resistance mutation (patient A). In the patient failing ART, a resistance genotypeshould be performed while the patient is on therapy. In the absence of ART, the majorityof virus reverts to wild type and the genotype appears normal (genotypes only sample thedominant viral form, though many exist); however, archived viruses in latent pools thatare not accessible with current commercially available assays may in fact harbor resis-tance. Therefore a genotype for patient C is likely to be of little value. Following the initi-ation of therapy the patient should have a 1 log (tenfold) reduction in plasma HIV RNAlevels within 1–2 months. Failure to achieve this response (patient B) may warrant a
change in therapy. Patient D has breakthrough failure after a period of intermittent com-pliance. T o determine if she has developed a new resistance pattern, she should have a
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 167
genotype performed while on therapy to allow for adequate selection pressure from the
antiviral agents to select the resistant virus leading to failure as the dominant strain.
IV-162. The answer is C.   (Chap. 121)   It is important to distinguish between primary (spontane-
ous) and secondary peritonitis. Primary peritonitis is a result of longstanding ascites, usually
as a result of cirrhosis. The pathogenesis is poorly understood but may involve bacteremic
spread or translocation across the gut wall of usually only a single species of pathogenic bac-teria. Secondary peritonitis is due to rupture of a hollow viscous or irritation of the perito-neum due to a contiguous abscess or pyogenic infection. It typically presents with peritonealsigns and in most cases represents a surgical emergency. Secondary peritonitis in a cirrhotic
patient is difﬁcult to distinguish on clinical grounds from primary (spontaneous) peritoni-tis. It is often overlooked because classic peritoneal signs are almost always lacking, and it isuniformly fatal in the absence of surgery. Suspicion for this diagnosis should occur when as-cites shows a protein >1g/dL, LDH greater than serum LDH, glucose <50 mg/dL, and/or apolymicrobial Gram stain. Once this diagnosis is suspected, an abdominal ﬁlm is indicated
to rule out free air, and prompt surgical consultation is warranted. Unlike with primary
(spontaneous) bacterial peritonitis, in cases of secondary peritonitis antibiotics should in-clude anaerobic coverage and often antifungal agents. This patient requires IV ﬂuid as hehas hypotension and tachycardia due to sepsis. Drotrecogin alfa has been shown to reducemortality in patients with sepsis; however, patients with thrombocytopenia, cirrhosis, andascites were excluded from inclusion in phase III trials of this agent.
IV-163. The answer is B.   (Chap. 197)   The primary risk factor for developing invasive Aspergil-
lus infection is neutropenia and glucocorticoid use. Risk is proportional to the degree and
length of neutropenia and the dose of glucocorticoid. HIV patients rarely develop inva-sive aspergillosis, and if they do, it is in the context of prolonged neutropenia and/or ad-vanced disease. Patients with graft-vs-host disease and uncontrolled leukemia are atparticularly elevated risk. The infection is seen in solid organ transplant patients, partic-
ularly those requiring high cumulative doses of glucocorticoids for graft rejection.
IV-164. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 34 and 128)   The PORT score is a system used to classify com-
munity-acquired pneumonia (CAP) from mild to severe. The score assigns points to 20items associated with mortality, including age, nursing home residence, coexisting illness
FIGURE IV-163 Invasive aspergillosis: conditions placing patients at elevated risk of acquisition and rel-
atively rapid progression. ICU, intensive care unit; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CMV ,
cytomegalovirus; GVHD, graft-vs-host disease. Degree of immunocompromise Risk of acquisition (and rapid progression), % “Normal immunity,” large inoculumHIV infectionChronic leukemiaShort-course glucocorticoids
Acute respiratory infection (e.g., influenza) Temporary neutropeniaLong-term glucocorticoids Solid organ transplant + rejection ± CMV 
AIDSLeukemia and profound neutropeniaAllogeneic stem cell transplant + GVHDRelapsed/uncontrolled leukemia 
510152025
Medical ICU, COPD ± sepsis 
168 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
(neoplastic disease, liver disease, congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, renal
disease), physical examination ﬁndings (mental status, respiratory rate, blood pressure,temperature, pulse rate), and laboratory/radiographic ﬁndings (pH, blood urea nitrogen,sodium, glucose, hematocrit, Pa
O2, pleural effusion). The resulting scores are used to de-
ﬁne ﬁve classes with progressively increasing mortality. These classes correlate with mor-tality and have been used to derive suggested management and site of treatment (homeversus hospital) criteria. Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for the development of pneu-monia but is not used in the prognostic scoring system.
IV-165. The answer is A.   (Chap. 161)   Rifampin is considered the most potent and important
antituberculosis drug. It is also active against other organisms, including some gram-positive and gram-negative organisms, as well as against Legionella  spp, Mycobacterium
marinum , and M. kansasii . It is notable for turning body ﬂuids a red-orange color. Its use
should be avoided or carefully monitored in patients with severe hepatic disease, but itdoes not need to be dose-adjusted in renal failure. Rifampin is a potent P450 CY3PA in-
ducer and may lower the half-life and therefore effective levels of many important drugs,including anticonvulsants, cyclosporine, hormonal contraceptives, protease inhibitors,narcotics, tricyclic antidepressants, azole antifungals, beta blockers, and many antibiotics.Patients need to be monitored for the effects of subtherapeutic levels whether by directlymeasuring drug levels (anticonvulsants, cyclosporine), direct effects of the drug (war-farin), or with clinical adjustment (contraceptives, protease inhibitors). While not stud-ied extensively, rifabutin has a similar, although likely lesser, effect on the samemedications as rifampin. Amiodarone is not metabolized by CY3PA.
IV-166. The answer is A.   (Chap. 145)   Ecthyma gangrenosum is a disseminated collection of geo-
graphic, painful, reddish, maculopapular lesions that rapidly progress from pink to purple andﬁnally to a black, dry necrosis. They are teeming with causative bacteria. In reviews on
ecthyma, Pseudomonas aeruginosa  is the most common isolate from blood and skin lesions.
However, many organisms can cause this foreboding rash. Neutropenic patients and AIDS pa-tients are at highest risk, but diabetics and intensive care unit (ICU) patients are also affected.Pseudomonal sepsis is severe with a high mortality. Its presentation is otherwise difﬁcult todiscern from other severe sepsis syndromes, with hypothermia, fever, hypotension, organdamage, encephalopathy, bandemia, and shock being common ﬁndings. Though antibiotic
use, severe burns, and long ICU stays increase the risk for Pseudomonas  infection, these expo-
sures are also risk factors for other bacterial infections, many of which also carry daunting re-sistant proﬁles. Because of P. aeruginosa’s propensity for multidrug resistance, two agents
(usually an anti-pseudomonal β-lactam plus an aminoglycoside or ciproﬂoxacin) are war-
ranted until culture data return conﬁrming sensitivity to one or both agents. At this point thechoice to narrow to one antibiotic or not is still debated and is largely physician preference.
IV-167. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 126 and 173)   Reactivation zoster is almost a predictable event
after stem cell transplant, occurring in 40% of allogeneic transplants and in 25% of autolo-gous transplants. Patients can develop zoster immediately, but the highest risk period is sev-eral months after transplant. Usually just a very painful local infection in theimmunocompetent host, transplant recipients’ zoster can disseminate systemically from lo-cal disease and cause multiorgan disease with effects on the lungs, liver, and central nervoussystem. Therefore, acyclovir or ganciclovir prophylaxis is the standard of care at most trans-plant centers. Some data suggest that low doses of acyclovir for a year posttransplant is ef-fective and may eliminate most cases of posttransplant zoster. Acyclovir is still extremelyreliable for prophylaxis and treatment of varicella zoster virus, with resistance being a veryrare event. Foscarnet would be the drug of choice under these very rare circumstances.
IV-168. The answer is C.   (Chap. 158)   Tuberculosis is most commonly transmitted from person
to person by airborne droplets. Factors that affect likelihood of developing tuberculosisinfection include the probability of contact with an infectious person, the intimacy andduration of contact, the degree of infectiousness of the contact, and the environment inwhich the contact takes place. The most infectious patients are those with cavitary pul-monary or laryngeal tuberculosis with about 10
5–107 tuberculous bacteria per milliliter
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 169
of sputum. Individuals who have a negative AFB smear with a positive culture for tuber-
culosis are less infectious but may transmit the disease. However, individuals with only
extrapulmonary (e.g., renal, skeletal) tuberculosis are considered noninfectious.
IV-169. The answer is C.   (Chap. 158)   While all the patients listed have an increased risk of de-
veloping reactivation tuberculosis, the greatest risk factor for development of active tu-berculosis is HIV positivity. The risk of developing active infection is greatest in thosewith the lowest CD4 counts; however, having a CD4 count above a threshold value doesnot negate the risk of developing an active infection. The reported incidence of develop-ing active tuberculosis in HIV-positive individuals with a positive PPD is 10% per year,compared to a lifetime risk of 10% in immunocompetent individuals. The relative risk ofdeveloping active tuberculosis in an HIV-positive individual is 100 times that of an im-munocompetent individual. All of the individuals listed as choices have risk factors fordeveloping active tuberculosis. Malnutrition and severe underweight confers a twofoldgreater risk of developing active tuberculosis, whereas IV drug use increases the risk 10–30 times. Silicosis also increases the risk of developing active tuberculosis 30 times. Whilethe risk of developing active tuberculosis is greatest in the ﬁrst year after exposure, therisk also increases in the elderly.
IV-170. The answer is A.   (Chap. 158)   The CT scan shows a large cavitary lesion in the right up-
per lobe of the lung. In this man from an endemic area for tuberculosis, this ﬁndingshould be treated as active pulmonary tuberculosis until proven otherwise. In addition,this patient’s symptoms suggest a chronic illness with low-grade fevers, weight loss, andtemporal wasting that would be consistent with active pulmonary tuberculosis. If a pa-tient is suspected of having active pulmonary tuberculosis, the initial managementshould include documentation of disease while protecting health care workers and thepopulation in general. This patient should be hospitalized in a negative-pressure room
on airborne isolation until three expectorated sputum samples have been demonstratedto be negative. The samples should preferably be collected in the early morning as the
burden of organisms is expected to be higher on a more concentrated sputum. The sensi-tivity of a single sputum for the detection of tuberculosis in conﬁrmed cases is only 40–60%. Thus, a single sputum sample is inadequate to determine infectivity and the pres-ence of active pulmonary tuberculosis. Skin testing with a PPD of the tuberculosis myco-bacterium is used to detect latent infection with tuberculosis and has no role indetermining whether active disease is present.
The cavitary lung lesion shown on the CT imaging of the chest could represent malig-
nancy or a bacterial lung abscess, but given that the patient is from a high-risk area for tu-berculosis, tuberculosis would be considered the most likely diagnosis until ruled out bysputum testing.
IV-171. The answer is A.   (Chap. 158; CA Benson et al: MMWR 53:1, 2004)   Initial treatment of
active tuberculosis associated with HIV disease does not differ from that of a non-HIV in-fected person. The standard treatment regimen includes four drugs: isoniazid, rifampin,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol (RIPE). These drugs are given for a total of 2 months incombination with pyridoxine (vitamin B
6) to prevent neurotoxicity from isoniazid. Fol-
lowing the initial 2 months, patients continue on isoniazid and rifampin to complete a to-tal of 6 months of therapy. These recommendations are the same as those of non-HIVinfected individuals. If the sputum culture remains positive for tuberculosis after 2months, the total course of antimycobacterial therapy is increased from 6 to 9 months. Ifan individual is already on antiretroviral therapy (ART) at the time of diagnosis of tuber-culosis, it may be continued, but often rifabutin is substituted for rifampin because ofdrug interactions between rifampin and protease inhibitors. In individuals not on ART atthe time of diagnosis of tuberculosis, it is not recommended to start ART concurrently be-cause of the risk of immune reconstitution inﬂammatory syndrome (IRIS) and an in-creased risk of medication side effects. IRIS occurs as the immune system improves withART and causes an intense inﬂammatory reaction directed against the infecting organ-ism(s). There have been fatal cases of IRIS in association with tuberculosis and initiation
170 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
of ART. In addition, both ART and antituberculosis drugs have many side effects. It can be
difﬁcult for a clinician to decide which medication is the cause of the side effects and maylead unnecessarily to alterations in the antituberculosis regimen. For these reasons, it isrecommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to await a response totreatment for tuberculosis prior to initiating ART. Three-drug regimens are associated
with a higher relapse rate if used as a standard 6-month course of therapy and, if used, re-quire a total of 9 months of therapy. Situations in which three-drug therapy may be usedare pregnancy, intolerance to a speciﬁc drug, and in the setting of resistance. A ﬁve-drugregimen using RIPE plus streptomycin is recommended as the standard re-treatment regi-men. Streptomycin and pyrazinamide are discontinued after 2 months if susceptibilitytesting is unavailable. If susceptibility testing is available, the treatment should be based
upon the susceptibility pattern. In no instance is it appropriate to withhold treatment in
the setting of active tuberculosis to await susceptibility testing.
IV-172. The answer is B.   (Chap. 158)   The aim of treatment of latent tuberculosis is to prevent
development of active disease, and the tuberculin skin test (PPD) is the most commonmeans of identifying cases of latent tuberculosis in high-risk groups. T o perform a tuber-culin skin test, 5 tuberculin units of PPD are placed subcutaneously in the forearm. Thedegree of induration is determined after 48–72 h. Erythema only does not count as a pos-itive reaction to the PPD. The size of the reaction to the tuberculin skin test determineswhether individuals should receive treatment for latent tuberculosis. In general, individ-uals in low-risk groups should not be tested. However, if tested, a reaction >15 mm is re-
quired to be considered as positive. School teachers are considered low-risk individuals.Thus, the reaction of 7 mm is not a positive result, and treatment is not required.
A size of ≥10 mm is considered positive in individuals who have been infected within 2
years or those with high-risk medical conditions. The individual working in an areawhere tuberculosis is endemic has tested newly positive by skin testing and should betreated as a newly infected individual. High-risk medical conditions for which treatmentof latent tuberculosis is recommended include diabetes mellitus, injection drug use, end-stage renal disease, rapid weight loss, and hematologic disorders.
PPD reactions ≥5 mm are considered positive for latent tuberculosis in individuals
with ﬁbrotic lesions on chest radiograph, those with close contact with an infected per-son, and those with HIV or who are otherwise immunosuppressed.
There are two situations in which treatment for latent tuberculosis is recommended re-
gardless of the results on skin testing. First, infants and children who have had close con-tact with an actively infected person should be treated. After 2 months of therapy, a skintest should be performed. Treatment can be discontinued if the skin test remains negativeat that time. Also, individuals who are HIV positive and have had close contact with aninfected person should be treated regardless of skin test results.
IV-173. The answer is B.   (Chap. 199)   Tinea versicolor is the most common superﬁcial skin in-
fection. It is caused by lipophilic yeasts of the genus Malassezia , most commonly M. fur-
fur. In tropical areas, the prevalence of tinea versicolor is 40–60%, whereas in temperate
areas it is about 1%. In general, most individuals seek evaluation for cosmetic reasons asthe lesions in tinea versicolor are asymptomatic or only mildly pruritic. The lesions typi-cally appear as patches of pink or coppery-brown skin, but the areas may be hypopig-mented in dark-skinned individuals. Diagnosis can be made by demonstrating theorganism on potassium hydroxide preparation where a typical “spaghetti and meatballs”appearance may be seen. This is due to the presence of both spore forms and hyphal
forms within the skin. Under long-wave UV A light (Wood’s lamp), the affected areas ﬂu-
oresce to yellow-green. The organism is sensitive to a variety of antifungals. Selenium sul-ﬁde shampoo, topical azoles, terbinaﬁne, and ciclopirox have all been used with success.A 2-week treatment regimen typically shows good results, but the infection typically re-curs within 2 years of initial treatment.
IV-174. Answer is D.   (Chap. 199)   Sporothrix schenkii  is a thermally dimorphic fungus found in
soil, plants, and moss and occurs most commonly in gardeners, farmers, ﬂorists, and for-
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 171
estry workers. Sporotrichosis develops after inoculation of the organism into the skin
with a contaminated puncture or scratch. The disease typically presents as a ﬁxed cutane-
ous lesion or with lymphocutaneous spread. The initial lesion typically ulcerates and be-
come verrucous in appearance. The draining lymphatic channels become affected in upto 80% of cases. This presents as painless nodules along the lymphatic channel, which ul-cerate. A deﬁnitive diagnosis is made by culturing the organism. A biopsy of the lesion
may show ovoid or cigar-shaped yeast forms. Treatment for sporotrichosis is systemictherapy. Options include oral itraconazole, saturated solution of potassium iodide, andterbinaﬁne. However, terbinaﬁne has not been approved for this indication in the UnitedStates. T opical antifungals are not effective. In cases of serious system disease such as pul-monary sporotrichosis, amphotericin B is the treatment of choice. Caspofungin is not ef-fective against S. schenkii .
IV-175. The answer is D.   (Chap. 139)   Generally thought of as a disease of children, epiglottitis
is increasingly becoming a disease of adults since the wide use of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
type B vaccination. Epiglottitis can cause life-threatening airway obstruction due to cel-
lulitis of the epiglottis and supraglottic tissues, classically due to H. inﬂuenzae  type B in-
fection. However, other organisms are also common causes including nontypeable H.
inﬂuenzae ,Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. parainﬂuenzae, Staphylococcus aureus , and viral
infection. The initial evaluation and treatment for epiglottitis in adults includes airwaymanagement and intravenous antibiotics. The patient presented here is demonstratingsigns of impending airway obstruction with stridor, inability to swallow secretions, anduse of accessory muscles of inspiration. A lateral neck x-ray shows the typical thumb signindicative of a swollen epiglottis. In addition, the patient has evidence of hypoventilationwith carbon dioxide retention. Thus, in addition to antibiotics, this patient should alsobe intubated and mechanically ventilated electively under a controlled setting as he is athigh risk for mechanical airway obstruction. Antibiotic therapy should cover the typicalorganisms outlined above and include coverage for oral anaerobes.
In adults presenting without overt impending airway obstruction, laryngoscopy would
be indicated to assess airway patency. Endotracheal intubation would be recommendedfor those with >50% airway obstruction. In children, endotracheal intubation is oftenrecommended as laryngoscopy in children has provoked airway obstruction to a muchgreater degree than adults, and increased risk of mortality has been demonstrated insome series in children when the airway is managed expectantly.
IV-176. The answer is E.   (Chap. 151)   The most likely infecting organism in this patient is Fran-
cisella tularensis . Gentamicin is the antibiotic of choice for the treatment of tularemia.
Fluoroquinolones have shown in vitro activity against F. tularensis  and have successfully
been used in a few cases of tularemia. Currently, however, it cannot be recommended asﬁrst-line therapy as data are limited in regards to its efﬁcacy relative to gentamicin, but
can be considered if an individual is unable to tolerate gentamicin. T o date, there havebeen no clinical trials of ﬂuoroquinolones to deﬁnitively demonstrate equivalency withgentamicin. Third-generation cephalosporins have in vitro activity against F. tularensis .
However, use of ceftriaxone in children with tularemia resulted in almost universal fail-ure. Likewise, tetracycline and chloramphenicol also have limited usefulness with ahigher relapse rate (up to 20%) when compared to gentamicin. F. tularensis  is a small
gram-negative, pleomorphic bacillus that is found both intra- and extracellularly. It isfound in mud, water, and decaying animal carcasses, and ticks and wild rabbits are thesource for most human infections in the southeast United States and Rocky Mountains.In western states, tabanid ﬂies are the most common vectors. The organisms usually enterthe skin through the bite of a tick or through an abrasion. On further questioning, thepatient above reported that during the camping trip he was primarily responsible forskinning the animals and preparing dinner. He did suffer a small cut on his right hand at
the site where the ulceration is apparent. The most common clinical manifestations of F.
tularensis  are ulceroglandular and glandular disease, accounting for 75–85% of cases. The
ulcer appears at the site of entry of the bacteria and lasts for 1–3 weeks and may develop ablack eschar at the base. The draining lymph nodes become enlarged and ﬂuctuant. They
172 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
may drain spontaneously. In a small percentage of patients, the disease becomes systemi-
cally spread, as is apparent in this case, with pneumonia, fevers, and sepsis syndrome.When this occurs, the mortality rate approaches 30% if untreated. However, with appro-priate antibiotic therapy the prognosis is very good. Diagnosis requires a high clinicalsuspicion as demonstration of the organism is difﬁcult. It rarely seen on Gram’s stain be-
cause the organisms stain weakly and are so small that they are difﬁcult to distinguishfrom background material. On polychromatically stained tissue, they may be seen bothintra- and extracellularly, singly or in clumps. Moreover, F. tularensis  is a difﬁcult organ-
ism to culture and requires cysteine-glucose–blood agar. However, most labs do not at-tempt to culture the organism because of the risk of infection in laboratory workers,requiring biosafety level 2 practices. Usually the diagnosis is conﬁrmed by agglutinationtesting with titers >1:160 conﬁrming diagnosis.
IV-177. The answer is A.   (Chap. 154)   Donovanosis is caused by the intracellular organism Ca-
lymmatobacterium granulomatis  and most often presents as a painless erythematous gen-
ital ulceration after a 1–4 week incubation period. However, incubation periods can be aslong as 1 year. The infection is predominantly sexually transmitted, and autoinoculation
can lead to formation of new lesions by contact with adjacent infected skin. Typically thelesion is painless but bleeds easily. Complications include phimosis in men and pseudo-elephantiasis of the labia in women. If the infection is untreated, it can lead to progressivedestruction of the penis or other organs. Diagnosis is made by demonstration of Dono-
van bodies  within large mononuclear cells on smears from the lesion. Donovan bodies re-
fers to the appearance of multiple intracellular organisms within the cytoplasm ofmononuclear cells. These organisms are bipolar and have an appearance similar to asafety pin. On histologic examination, there is an increase in the number of plasma cellswith few neutrophils; additionally, epithelial hyperplasia is present and can resemble neo-plasia. A variety of antibiotics can be used to treat donovanosis including macrolides, tet-racyclines, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and chloramphenicol. Treatment should becontinued until the lesion has healed, often requiring ≥5 weeks of treatment.
All of the choices listed in the question above are in the differential diagnosis of penile
ulcerations. Lymphogranuloma venereum is endemic in the Caribbean. The ulcer of pri-
mary infection heals spontaneously, and the second phase of the infection results inmarkedly enlarged inguinal lymphadenopathy, which may drain spontaneously.  H. du-
creyi  results in painful genital ulcerations, and the organism can be cultured from the le-
sion. The painless ulcerations of cutaneous leishmaniasis can appear similarly to those of
donovanosis but usually occur on exposed skin. Histologic determination of intracellularparasites can distinguish leishmaniasis deﬁnitively from donovanosis. Finally, it is un-likely that the patient has syphilis in the setting of a negative rapid plasma reagin test, andthe histology is inconsistent with this diagnosis.
IV-178. The answer is C.   (Chap. 140)   This patient has subacute bacterial endocarditis due to
infection with one of the HACEK organisms. The HACEK organisms ( Haemophilus ,Ac-
tinobacillus ,Cardiobacterium ,Eikenella,  and Kingella ) are gram-negative rods that reside
in the oral cavity. They are responsible for about 3% of cases of infective endocarditis inmost series. They are the most common cause of gram-negative endocarditis in non-drugabusers. Most patients have a history of poor dentition or recent dental procedure. Often,
patients are initially diagnosed with culture-negative endocarditis, as these organismsmay be slow growing and fastidious. Cultures must be speciﬁed for prolonged culture of
fastidious organisms. HACEK endocarditis is typically subacute, and the risk of embolicphenomena to the bone, skin, kidneys, and vasculature is high. Vegetations are seen on~85% of transthoracic echocardiograms. Cure rates are excellent with antibiotics alone;native valves require 4 weeks and prosthetic valves require 6 weeks of treatment. Ceftriax-one is the treatment of choice, with ampicillin/gentamicin as an alternative. Sensitivities
may be delayed due to the organism’s slow growth.
IV-179. The answer is B.   (Chap. 140)   Capnocytophaga canimorsus  is the most likely organism
to have caused fulminant disease in this alcoholic patient following a dog bite. Eikenella
IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS 173
and Haemophilus  are common mouth ﬂora in humans but not in dogs. Staphylococcus
can cause sepsis but is less likely in this scenario.
IV-180. The answer is A.   (Chap. 117)   Inﬂuenza occurs year round in the tropics and is the most
common vaccine-preventable infection in travelers. Documentation of vaccination against
yellow fever is required in many countries. Measles is prevalent in much of the developingworld, and all travelers should have documented vaccination. T etanus should be up to datefor international travelers, and rabies vaccination should be discussed with patients.
IV-181. The answer is B.   (Chap. 117)   Malaria prophylaxis recommendations vary by region.
Currently the recommended malaria prophylaxis for Central America is chloroquine. Incontrast, due to chloroquine resistance of falciparum malaria, prophylaxis in India andmost areas in Africa is with atovaquone/proguanil, doxycycline, or meﬂoquine. The fol-lowing table represents the chemoprophylaxis regimens for malaria arranged by countryas currently recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
IV-182. The answer is A.   (Chap. 117)   The causes of fever in travelers vary by geography. In
general, all febrile travelers returning from malaria-endemic regions should be assumedto have malaria until ruled out or another diagnosis established, since falciparum malariamay be life-threatening and effective therapy is available. Dengue is particularly commonin Southeast Asia. Most cases are self-limited and require supportive therapy. A smallproportion, however, can develop hemorrhagic fever or a shock syndrome. The table be-low lists the most common causes of febrile illness in returning travelers by country.
IV-183. The answer is D.   (Chap. 119)   Erysipelas is a soft tissue infection caused by Streptococ-
cus pyogenes  that occurs most frequently on the face or extremities. The infection is
marked by abrupt onset of ﬁery-red swelling with intense pain. The infection progressesrapidly and is marked by well-deﬁned and indurated margins. Flaccid bullae may developon the second or third day. Only rarely does the infection involve the deeper soft tissues.TABLE IV-181 Malaria Chemosuppressive Regimens According to Geographic Areaa
Geographic Area Drug of Choice Alternatives
Central America (north of Panama), 
Haiti, Dominican Republic, Iraq, 
Egypt, Turkey, northern Argentina, and ParaguayChloroquine Mefloquine
DoxycyclineAtovaquone/
proguanil
South America including Panama (ex-
cept northern Argentina and Para-
guay); Asia (including Southeast Asia); Africa; and OceaniaMeﬂoquineDoxycyclineAtovaquone-proguanil 
(Malarone)Primaquine
Thai-Myanmar and 
Thai-Cambodian bordersDoxycycline
Atovaquone-proguanil
(Malarone)
aSee CDC’s Health Information for International Travel 2005–2006 .
Note:  See also Chap. 203.
TABLE IV-182 Etiology and Geographic Distribution (Percent) of Systemic Febrile 
Illness in Returned Travelers ( N = 3907)
Etiology Carib CAm SAm SSA SCA SEA
Malaria <1 13 13  62 14 13
Dengue  23 12 14 <1 14 32
Mononucleosis    7   7   8    1   2   3Rickettsia    0   0   0    6   1   2
Salmonella    2   3  2 <1 14   3
Note: Carib, Caribbean; CAm, Central America; SAm, South America; SSA, Sub-Saharan Africa; SCA,
South Central Asia; SEA, Southeast Asia. Bold type is for emphasis only.
Source:  Revised from Table 2 in Freedman et al, 2006. Used with permission from the Massachusetts
Medical Society.
174 IV. I NFECTIOUS  DISEASES  — ANSWERS
Penicillin is the treatment of choice. However, swelling may progress despite appropriate
treatment with desquamation of the affected area.
IV-184. The answer is C.   (Chap. 119)   This patient is presenting with septic shock secondary to
necrotizing fasciitis with group A streptococcus. Necrotizing fasciitis presents with feverand pain of the affected area that progresses rapidly to severe systemic symptoms. Swell-ing and brawny edema may be present early in the disease, progressing rapidly to dark-red induration with bullae ﬁlled with bluish to purple ﬂuid. Pathologically, the underly-ing dermis shows extensive thrombosis of vessels in the dermis. Necrotizing fasciitis iscommonly caused by group A streptococcus, speciﬁcally S. pyogenes, or mixed aerobic-
anaerobic infections. In this patient, the presence of gram-positive cocci in chains sug-
gests S. pyogenes  as the underlying cause. The initial treatment of patients with necrotiz-
ing fasciitis is surgical debridement of the affected area. The area of debridement isfrequently very large. During surgery, all necrotic tissue should be removed and any in-creased compartment pressure should be relieved. In addition, appropriate antibioticsshould be initiated. For group A streptococcus, the combination of clindamycin and pen-
icillin should be used. Penicillin is bacteriocidal for streptococcus as is clindamycin. Clin-damycin also neutralizes the toxins produced by group A streptococcus. Antibiotictherapy alone should not be used as necrotizing fasciitis is rapidly fatal without surgicalintervention. Vancomycin is not a ﬁrst-line antibiotic in necrotizing fasciitis and shouldbe considered only for those with penicillin allergy.
IV-185. The answer is C. (Chap. 198)   This patient has signs and symptoms of mucormycosis.
Although mucormycosis is a relatively uncommon invasive fungal infection, patientswith poorly controlled diabetes, patients receiving glucocorticoids, immunocompro-mised patients, or patients with iron overload syndromes receiving desferrioxamine havean enhanced susceptibility to this devastating infection. The “gold standard” diagnosis istissue culture, but a common hallmark is the black eschar noted on the palate, which rep-resents invasion of the fungus into tissue, with necrosis. The black eschar in this scenarioshould prompt the clinician to do more than prescribe treatment for sinusitis. Black es-chars on the extremities can be found with anthrax infection or spider bites. Given themortality associated with this infection and the rapidity with which it progresses, it is notprudent to wait for an ENT consultation after a course of antibiotics. The infection isusually fatal. Successful therapy requires reversal of the underlying predisposition (glu-cose control in this case), aggressive surgical debridement, and early initiation of antifun-gal therapy. Voriconazole is not thought to be effective in the treatment of mucormycosis.Posaconazole, an experimental azole antifungal, has been shown to be effective in mousemodels of the disease and has been used in patients unable to tolerate amphotericin.
IV-186. The answer is A.   (Chap. 194)   Although spontaneous cures of pulmonary infection
with Blastomyces dermatitidis  have been well documented, almost all patients with blasto-
mycosis should be treated since there is no way to distinguish which patients will progressor disseminate. Extrapulmonary disease should always be treated, especially if the patient
is immunocompromised. Itraconazole is indicated for non-central nervous system extra-pulmonary disease in mild to moderate cases. Otherwise, amphotericin B is the treat-
ment of choice, especially if there has been treatment failure with itraconazole. Theechinocandins have variable activity against B. dermatitidis  and are not recommended for
blastomycosis. The triazole antifungals have not been studied extensively in human cases
of blastomycosis. Fluoroquinolones have activity against many mycobacterial species, but
do not have activity against fungi, including B. dermatitidis .
175V . DISORDERS OF THE 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
V-1.   A 46-year-old white female presents to your ofﬁce with
concerns about her diagnosis of hypertension 1 month
previously. She asks you about her likelihood of develop-ing complications of hypertension, including renal failureand stroke. She denies any past medical history other thanhypertension and has no symptoms that suggest second-ary causes. She currently is taking hydrochlorothiazide 25mg/d. She smokes half a pack of cigarettes daily and drinksalcohol no more than once per week. Her family history issigniﬁcant for hypertension in both parents. Her motherdied of a cerebrovascular accident. Her father is alive buthas coronary artery disease and is on hemodialysis. Herblood pressure is 138/90. Body mass index is 23. She hasno retinal exudates or other signs of hypertensive retinop-athy. Her point of maximal cardiac impulse is not dis-placed but is sustained. Her rate and rhythm are regularand without gallops. She has good peripheral pulses. An
electrocardiogram reveals an axis of –30 degrees with
borderline voltage criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy.Creatinine is 1.0 mg/dL. Which of the following items inher history and physical examination is a risk factor for apoor prognosis in a patient with hypertension?
A. Family history of renal failure and cerebrovascular
disease
B. Persistent elevation in blood pressure after the initi-
ation of therapy
C. Ongoing tobacco use
D. Ongoing use of alcoholE. Presence of left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG
V-2.   A 68-year-old male presents to your ofﬁce for routine
follow-up care. He reports that he is feeling well and hasno complaints. His past medical history is signiﬁcant forhypertension and hypercholesterolemia. He continues tosmoke a pack of cigarettes daily. He is taking chlorthali-done 25 mg daily, atenolol 25 mg daily, and pravastatin 40mg nightly. Blood pressure is 133/85, and heart rate is 66.Cardiac and pulmonary examinations are unremarkable.A pulsatile abdominal mass is felt just to the left of theumbilicus and measures approximately 4 cm. Y ou conﬁrmthe diagnosis of abdominal aortic aneurysm by CT imag-ing. It is located infrarenally and measures 4.5 cm. All thefollowing are true about the patient’s diagnosis except
A. The 5-year risk of rupture of an aneurysm of this
size is 1 to 2%.
B. Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted
because of the size of the aneurysm.
C. Infrarenal endovascular stent placement is an op-
tion if the aneurysm experiences continued growthin light of the location of the aneurysm infrarenally.
D. Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted
if the patient develops symptoms of recurrent ab-dominal or back pain.
E. Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted
if the aneurysm expands beyond 5.5 cm.
V-3.   A 45-year-old woman presents to the emergency room
complaining of progressive dyspnea on exertion andabrupt onset of painful ulcerations on her toes. She hasnoted the symptoms for the past 3 months. The dyspneahas progressed such that she is only able to walk about 1block without stopping. Over this same time, she has no-ticed a cough that occasionally produces thin, pink-tinged sputum. She also has reports that her breathing isworse at night. She sleeps on three pillows but awakenswith dyspnea once or twice nightly. Over the past 2 days,she has developed painful ulcerations on toes 1 and 4 onher left foot. She reports that the areas started as reddishpainful discoloration that ulcerated over the ensuingdays. She denies fevers, chills, or weight loss. She has nohistory of chest pain, heart disease, or heart murmurs.She has been in good health until the past 3 months. Shetakes no medications. Her last dental visit was ~8 monthsago. On physical examination, she appears in no distress.Vital signs: blood pressure of 145/92 mmHg, heart rate of95 beats/min, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, temper-ature is 37.7°C, and Sa
O2 is 95% on room air. The cardio-
vascular examination reveals a regular rate and rhythm.There is a III/VI mid-diastolic murmur with an occa-sional low-pitched mid-diastolic sound that occurs whenthe patient is in the upright position. The jugular venousV-2.   (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
176 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
pressure is measured at 10 cm above the sternal angle. A
few bibasilar crackles are noted. There is 1+ pittingedema bilaterally to the knees. On her left great toe, thereis an area of erythema with central ulceration covered bya black eschar. A similar area is present on her left fourthtoe. The peripheral pulses are full and 2+. The patientundergoes an echocardiogram, shown in the ﬁgure. Whatis the most appropriate plan of care for this patient?A. Consult cardiac surgery for deﬁnitive therapy.B. Initiate therapy with IV penicillin and gentamicin.C. Obtain blood cultures and initiate therapy based
upon results.
D. Obtain a positron emission tomographic scan to as-
sess for primary malignancy.
E. Perform left heart catheterization and consider sur-
gery based upon results.
V-4.   Y our 57-year-old clinic patient is seeing you in follow-
up for chronic stable angina. He is a former heavy to-bacco smoker who maintained an unhealthy diet and ex-ercise routine until recently. Since initiating a healthy dietand commencing an exercise regimen, he has lost weightand improved his blood pressure control. A cardiac cath-eterization 1 month ago showed two nonobstructive cor-onary lesions in the left circumﬂex artery. He still hasangina, which is reproducible with moderate exercise thatis fully relieved by one sublingual nitroglycerin. Which ofthe following factors is least likely to be contributing tohis angina?A. Epicardial coronary artery resistanceB. Heart rateC. Hemoglobin concentrationD. Diffusion capacity of the lung
V-5.   In the tracing below, what type of conduction abnor-
mality is present and where in the conduction pathway isthe block usually found?
A. First-degree A V block; intranodal
B. Second-degree A V block type 1; intranodalC. Second-degree A V block type 2; infranodalD. Second-degree A V block type 2; intranodal
FIGURE V-3
FIGURE V-5
V-3.   (Continued) V-3.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 177
V-6.   A 62-year-old male loses consciousness in the street,
and resuscitative efforts are undertaken. In the emergency
room an electrocardiogram is obtained, part of which isshown below. Which of the following disorders could ac-count for this man’s presentation?A. HypokalemiaB. HyperkalemiaC. Intracerebral hemorrhageD. Digitalis toxicityE. Hypocalcemic tetany
V-7.   Y ou are seeing an 86-year-old male patient with severe
aortic stenosis in follow-up. He has had severe aortic ste-nosis for 4 years without symptoms. Recently, he hasscaled back his activities due to light-headedness with ex-ertion. His wife reports one episode a week ago when hepassed out brieﬂy while trying to do his gardening. Onexamination, his blood pressure is 150/85 mmHg, heartrate is 76 beats/min. He has a grade III/VI systolic ejec-tion murmur that extends to S
2 with radiation to the ca-
rotids. S 2 is barely audible, consistent with his prior
examinations. Carotid pulses are delayed as they havebeen in the past. He has femoral and abdominal aorticbruits. Peripheral pulses are 2+ bilaterally. Laboratorydata show a creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL, low-density lipopro-tein cholesterol of 75 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein of50 mg/dL. What is the next appropriate step in this pa-tient’s management?
A. Aortic valve surgery
B. Cardiac rehabilitationC. End-of-life arrangements with hospiceD. Improved blood pressure controlE. Transthoracic echocardiogram
V-8.   A 35-year-old man is evaluated for dyspnea. He ﬁrst
noticed shortness of breath with exertion about 12months ago. It has become progressively worse such thathe is only able to walk about 20 ft without stopping. Ingeneral, he rates his health as good, although he recallsbeing told when he was younger that he had a heart mur-mur. He has not seen a physician in 15 years. On exami-nation, he is noted to be hypoxic with an Sa
O2 of 85% on
room air. His cardiac examination reveals a harsh ma-chinery-like murmur that is continuous throughout sys-tole and diastole with a palpable thrill. There is latesystolic accentuation of the murmur at the upper left ster-nal angle. He is noted to have cyanosis and clubbing of histoes but not his ﬁngers. What is the most likely cause ofthe patient’s murmur?
A. Anomalous pulmonary venous return
B. Coarctation of the aortaC. Patent ductus arteriosusD. T etralogy of FallotE. Ventricular septal defect
V-9.    In the cardiac care unit, you are caring for a 69-year-
old man with an inferior ST-segment elevation myocar-dial infarction (MI). He has undergone successful urgentpercutaneous coronary intervention and is recovering.Later that day, he complains of shortness of breath andorthopnea. His vital signs show blood pressure of 118/74mmHg, heart rate of 63 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 91% on room air.Lung examination shows crackles bilaterally. On cardiacexamination, the jugular venous pressure is elevated.There is a grade III/VI musical systolic murmur heard atthe base of the heart with a crescendo-decrescendo pat-tern. The intensity of the murmur does not change withrespiration. The murmur does not radiate to the axilla.A two-dimensional echocardiogram is requested. Whichof the following echocardiographic ﬁndings is mostlikely?
A. Eccentric mitral regurgitant jet
B. High-frequency ﬂuttering of the anterior mitral
leaﬂet
C. Respiratory variation in velocity across the mitral
valve
D. Systolic anterior motion of the aortic (anterior) mi-
tral valve
E. Ventricular septal defectFIGURE V-6
V-6.     (Continued)
178 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-10.   A 44-year-old man with a history of hypertension
that is poorly controlled presents to the emergency room
complaining of severe chest pain. The pain beganabruptly this afternoon while at rest. He describes thepain as tearing and radiates to the back. He also is com-plaining of feeling lightheaded but does not have nauseaor vomiting. He has never had a similar episode of painand is usually able to exercise at the gym without chestpain. In addition to hypertension, he also has a history ofhypercholesterolemia. He has been prescribed felo-dipine, 10 mg once daily, and rosuvastatin, 10 mg oncedaily, but says that he only takes them intermittently. Hesmokes 1 pack of cigarettes daily and has done so sincethe age of 20. His family history is signiﬁcant for coro-nary artery disease in his father, who had a heart attackat the age of 60. On physical examination, the patient ap-pears uncomfortable and diaphoretic. Vital signs: bloodpressure is 190/110 mmHg, heart rate is 112 beats/min,respiratory rate is 26 breaths/min, temperature is 36.3°C,and Sa
O2 is 98% on room air. His carotid pulses are full
and bounding. His cardiac examination reveals a hyper-dynamic precordium. The rhythm is tachycardic but reg-ular. An S
4 is present. There is a II/VI diastolic murmur
heard at the lower left sternal border. An electrocardio-gram (ECG) shows 1 mm of ST elevation in leads II, III,and aV
F. A contrast-enhanced chest CT shows a dissec-
tion of the ascending aorta with a small amount of peri-cardial ﬂuid. What is the most appropriate managementof the patient?
A. Emergent cardiac catheterization
B. Emergent cardiac surgeryC. Intravenous nitroprusside and esmolol aloneD. Intravenous nitroprusside and esmolol and cardiac
surgery emergently
E. Thrombolysis with tenecteplase
V-11.   A 42-year-old male from El Salvador complains of sev-
eral months of dyspnea on exertion. Physical examinationreveals an elevated jugular venous pressure, clear lungs, athird heart sound, a pulsatile liver, ascites, and dependentedema. Chest radiography reveals no cardiomegaly and clearlung ﬁelds. An echocardiogram demonstrates normal tomildly decreased left ventricular systolic function. The initialdiagnostic workup should include all the following except
A. computed tomography of the chestB. coronary angiogramC. fat pad biopsyD. iron studiesE. tuberculin skin test
V-12.   A 29-year-old woman is in the intensive care unit
with rhabdomyolysis due to compartment syndrome ofthe lower extremities after a car accident. Her clinicalcourse has been complicated by acute renal failure and se-vere pain. She has undergone fasciotomies and is admit-ted to the intensive care unit. An electrocardiogram(ECG) is obtained (shown below). What is the most ap-propriate course of action at this point?
A. 18-lead ECG
B. Coronary catheterizationC. HemodialysisD. Intravenous ﬂuids and a loop diureticE. Ventilation/perfusion imaging
FIGURE V-12  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6V-10.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 179
V-13.   A 54-year-old male with type 2 diabetes mellitus re-
ports 3 months of exertional chest pain. His physical ex-
amination is notable for obesity with a body mass index(BMI) of 32 kg/m
2, blood pressure of 150/90, an S 4, no
cardiac murmurs, and no peripheral edema. Fasting glu-cose is 130 mg/dL, and serum triglycerides are 200 mg/dL. Which of the following is most likely in this patient?
A. Elevated high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
B. Insulin resistanceC. Larger than normal LDL particlesD. Reduced serum endothelin levelE. Reduced serum homocysteine level
V-14.   A 45-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care unit
with symptoms of congestive heart failure. He is addicted toheroin and cocaine and uses both drugs daily via injection.His blood cultures have yielded methicillin-sensitive Staphy-
lococcus aureus  in four of four bottles within 12 h. His vital
signs show a blood pressure of 110/40 mmHg and a heartrate of 132 beats/min. There is a IV/VI diastolic murmurheard along the left sternal border. A schematic representa-tion of the carotid pulsation is shown in the ﬁgure below.What is the most likely cause of the patient’s murmur?
A. Aortic regurgitation
B. Aortic stenosisC. Mitral stenosisD. Mitral regurgitationE. Tricuspid regurgitation
V-15.   A 30-year-old male is transported to the emergency
room after a motor vehicle accident. He is complaining ofmoderate chest pain. He becomes hypotensive, and hisblood pressure pattern reveals a pulsus paradoxus. The heartsounds appear distant. An examination of the neck veinsfails to reveal a Kussmaul’s sign. An electrocardiogram is un-remarkable, and a chest x-ray reveals an enlarged cardiac sil-houette. A right heart catheter is placed. Which of thefollowing values is consistent with this patient’s diagnosis?V-16.   Y ou are treating a patient with stable angina pectoris.
She is a postmenopausal woman with refractory anginadespite therapy with metoprolol and isosorbide dinitrate,as well as her other anti-ischemic medications. Past med-ical history is signiﬁcant for coronary artery bypass graft-ing (CABG), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,ﬁrst-degree atrioventricular block, left bundle branchblock, and dyslipidemia. A recent cardiac catheterizationshowed coronary artery disease not amenable to percuta-neous intervention, and the patient is not interested inredo of the CABG. Renal function is normal. Her left ven-tricular ejection fraction is 15%, and she has New Y orkHeart Association class II heart failure symptoms. Bloodpressure and pulse allow for the addition of a calciumchannel blocker to her regimen. Which calcium channel–blocking medication is appropriate for this patient?
A. Amlodipine
B. DiltiazemC. Immediate-release nifedipineD. Verapamil
V-17.   A 30-year-old female is seen in the clinic before un-
dergoing an esophageal dilation for a stricture. Her pastmedical history is notable for mitral valve prolapse withmild regurgitation. She takes no medications and is aller-gic to penicillin. Her physician should recommend whichof the following?
A. Clarithromycin 500 mg PO 1 h before the procedure
B. Clindamycin 450 mg PO 1 h before the procedureC. Vancomycin 1 g intravenously before the procedureD. The procedure is low-risk, and therefore no prophy-
laxis is indicated.
E. Her valvular lesion is low-risk, and therefore no
prophylaxis is indicated.
V-18.   A 78-year-old male presents to the clinic complaining
that every time he shaves with a straight razor, he passesout. His symptoms have been occurring for the last 2months. Occasionally, when he puts on a tight collar, hepasses out as well. The loss of consciousness is brief, hehas no associated prodrome, and he feels well afterward.His past medical history is notable for hypertension andhypercholesterolemia. His only medication is hydrochlo-rothiazide. On physical exam his vital signs are normal,and his cardiac exam is normal with the exception of afourth heart sound. Which of the following is the mostappropriate next diagnostic test?
A. Stress echocardiography
B. Adenosine thallium scanC. Computed tomogram of the neckD. Carotid sinus massageE. Tilt table test
V-19.    Y ou are called to the bedside to see a patient with
Prinzmetal’s angina who is having chest pain. The patienthad a cardiac catheterization 2 days prior showing a 60%
FIGURE V-14
Pressure, RA 
mmHgPressure, PA 
mmHgPressure, 
PCW mmHg
A 16 75/30 11
B 16 34/16 16
C 16 100/30 28
D 16 45/22 20
E 16 22/12 10
Normal values 0–5 12–28/3–13 3–11
Note:  RA, atrial pressure; PA, pulmonary arterial; PCW, pulmonary
capillary wedge

180 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
stenosis of the right coronary artery with associated
spasm during coronary angiogram. At the patient’s bed-side, which ﬁnding is consistent with the diagnosis ofPrinzmetal’s angina?
A. Chest pain reproduced by palpation of the chest wall
B. Nonspeciﬁc ST-T-wave abnormalitiesC. Relief of pain with drinking cold waterD. ST-segment elevation in II, III, and aV
F
E. ST-segment depression in I, aV L, and V 6
V-20.   A 32-year-old female is seen in the emergency depart-
ment for acute shortness of breath. A helical CT shows noevidence of pulmonary embolus, but incidental note ismade of dilatation of the ascending aorta to 4.3 cm. All thefollowing are associated with this ﬁnding except
A. syphilisB. Takayasu’s arteritisC. giant cell arteritisD. rheumatoid arthritisE. systemic lupus erythematosus
V-21.   A 38-year-old Bolivian man is admitted to the car-
diac intensive care unit with decompensated heart failure.He has no known past medical history and takes no med-ications. He emigrated from Mexico 10 years ago andcurrently works in a retail store. On physical examina-tion, he has signs of congestion and poor perfusion. Anelectrocardiogram shows ﬁrst-degree atrioventricularblock and right bundle branch block. An echocardiogramshows dilated and thinned ventricles. He has an apical an-eurysm in the left ventricle with thrombus formation.Y ou treat his heart failure symptomatically and begin an-ticoagulation. A cardiac catheterization shows normalcoronaries without atherosclerosis. Which statement istrue regarding this patient’s prognosis?
A. Aggressive lipid lowering (low-density lipoprotein
<70 mg/dL) has been shown to be beneﬁcial in this
condition.
B. Calcium channel blockers will prevent progression
of his disease.
C. Cardiac transplantation offers the only cure for this
condition.
D. His cardiac function will improve over time.E. Nifurtimox offers a reasonable chance for cure.
V-22.   Y ou are evaluating a 43-year-old woman who com-
plains of dyspnea on exertion. She was well until 2 monthsago when she noticed decreasing exercise tolerance and fa-tigue. She denies chest pain but does have New Y ork HeartAssociation class II symptoms. She has no orthopnea orparoxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She has noticed bilateralankle swelling that improves with recumbency. She has onechild and has no other past medical history. On cardiac ex-amination, the jugular venous pressure is slightly elevated.There is a prominent a wave. There is a right-ventriculartap felt along the left sternal border. S
1 is prominent and P 2
is accentuated. There is a sharp opening sound heard bestduring expiration just medial to the cardiac apex, whichoccurs shortly after S
2. A diastolic rumble is heard at the
apex with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position.Hepatomegaly and ankle edema are present. The pulse isregular and blood pressure is 108/60 mmHg. This patientis at high risk for developing which of the following?
A. Atrial ﬁbrillation
B. Left-ventricular dysfunctionC. Multifocal atrial tachycardiaD. Right bundle branch blockE. Right-ventricular outﬂow tract tachycardia
V-23.   Which of the following conditions is not associated
with sinus bradycardia?
A. Brucellosis
B. LeptospirosisC. HypothyroidismD. Advanced liver diseaseE. Typhoid fever
V-24.   All of the following are common consequences of
congenital heart disease in the adult except
A. Eisenmenger syndromeB. erythrocytosisC. infective endocarditisD. pulmonary hypertensionE. stroke
V-25.   Acute hyperkalemia is associated with which of the
following electrocardiographic changes?
A. QRS widening
B. Prolongation of the ST segmentC. A decrease in the PR intervalD. Prominent U wavesE. T-wave ﬂattening
V-26.   All of the following clinical ﬁndings are consistent
with severe mitral stenosis except
A. atrial ﬁbrillationB. opening snap late after S
2
C. pulmonary vascular congestionD. pulsatile liverE. right-ventricular heave
V-27.   All the following patients should be evaluated for sec-
ondary causes of hypertension except
A. a 37-year-old male with strong family history of hy-
pertension and renal failure who presents to yourofﬁce with a blood pressure of 152/98
B. a 26-year-old female with hematuria and a family
history of early renal failure who has a blood pres-sure of 160/88V-22.   (Continued) V-19.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 181
C. a 63-year-old male with no past history with a blood
pressure of 162/90
D. a 58-year-old male with a history of hypertension since
age 45 whose blood pressure has become increasingly
difﬁcult to control on four antihypertensive agents
E. a 31-year-old female with complaints of severe
headaches, weight gain, and new-onset diabetesmellitus with a blood pressure of 142/89
V-28.   Y ou are seeing a 71-year-old patient with tachycardia-
bradycardia syndrome in follow-up. She had a single-leadventricular pacemaker implanted 2 years ago and has nonew complaints. Past medical history also includes an oldstroke with mild residual left hand weakness and diabetes.Her last transthoracic echocardiogram showed a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 35–40% but no valvular ab-normalities. The left atrium is mildly enlarged. Hermedical regimen includes aspirin, metformin, metoprolol,lisinopril, lasix, and dipyridamole. What intervention, ifany, should be considered for this patient at this time?
A. Anticoagulation
B. Cardiac catheterizationC. Discontinuation of dipyridamoleD. None, as she has no new complaints
V-29.   A 64-year-old woman with known stage IV breast
cancer presents to the emergency room with severe dysp-nea and hypotension. Her blood pressure is 92/50mmHg, and heart rate is 112 beats/min. She has dis-tended neck veins that do not collapse with inspiration.Heart sounds are mufﬂed. The systolic blood pressuredrops to 70 with inspiration. An echocardiogram shows alarge pericardial effusion with right ventricular diastoliccollapse consistent with pericardial tamponade. Which ofthe following values most accurately demonstrate the ex-pected values on right heart catheterization?V-30.    The ECG most likely was obtained from which of the
following patients?
A. A 33-year-old female with acute-onset severe head-
ache, disorientation, and intraventricular blood on
head CT scan
B. A 42-year-old male with sudden-onset chest pain
while playing tennis
C. A 54-year-old female with a long history of smoking
and 2 days of increasing shortness of breath andwheezing
D. A 64-year-old female with end-stage renal insufﬁ-
ciency who missed dialysis for the last 4 days
E. A 78-year-old male with syncope, delayed carotid
upstrokes, and a harsh systolic murmur in the rightsecond intercostal space
Right-atrial 
pressure, 
mmHgRight-ven-
tricular pressure, mmHgPulmonary 
artery pressure, mmHgPulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure, mmHg
A. 5 20/5 25/10 12
B. 8 20/10 30/12 20C. 17 40/17 45/17 17D. 18 40/20 45/25 10FIGURE V-30
V-27.   (Continued)
182 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-31.   Y ou are evaluating a new patient in your clinic who
brings in this electrocardiogram (ECG) to the visit. The
ECG was performed on the patient 2 weeks ago. Whatcomplaint do you expect to elicit from the patient?A. AnginaB. HemoptysisC. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspneaD. Tachypalpitations
V-32.   A patient is found to have a holosystolic murmur on
physical examination. With deep inspiration, the inten-sity of the murmur increases. This is consistent withwhich of the following?
A. Atrial-septal defect
B. Austin Flint murmurC. Carvallo’s signD. Chronic mitral regurgitation
E. Gallavardin effect
V-33.   A 37-year-old male with Wolff-Parkinson-White syn-
drome develops a broad-complex irregular tachycardia ata rate of 200 beats per minute. He appears comfortableand has little hemodynamic impairment. Useful treat-ment at this point might include
A. Digoxin
B. AmiodaroneC. PropranololD. Verapamil
E. Direct-current cardioversionV-34.   A 72-year-old man seeks evaluation for leg pain with
ambulation. He describes the pain as an aching to crampypain in the muscles of his thighs. The pain subsides withinminutes of resting. On rare occasions, he has noted numb-ness of his right foot at rest and pain in his right leg haswoken him at night. He has a history of hypertension andcerebrovascular disease. He previously had a transient is-chemic attack and underwent right carotid endarterectomy4 years previously. He currently takes aspirin, irbesartan,hydrochlorothiazide, and atenolol on a daily basis. On ex-amination, he is noted to have diminished dorsalis pedisand posterior tibial pulses bilaterally. The right dorsal pedispulse is faint. There is loss of hair in the distal extremities.Capillary reﬁll is approximately 5 s in the right foot and 3 sin the left foot. Which of the following ﬁndings would besuggestive of critical ischemia of the right foot?
A. Ankle-brachial index <0.3
B. Ankle-brachial index <0.9C. Ankle-brachial index >1.2D. Lack of palpable dorsalis pedis pulseE. Presence of pitting edema of the extremities
FIGURE V-31  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
V-31.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 183
V-35.   A 24-year-old male seeks medical attention for the
recent onset of headaches. The headaches are described as
“pounding” and occur during the day and night. He hashad minimal relief with acetaminophen. Physical exami-nation is notable for a blood pressure of 185/115 mmHgin the right arm, a heart rate of 70/min, arterioventricular(A V) nicking on funduscopic examination, normal jugu-lar veins and carotid arteries, a pressure-loaded PMI withan apical S
4, no abdominal bruits, and reduced pulses in
both lower extremities. Review of symptoms is positiveonly for leg fatigue with exertion. Additional measure-ment of blood pressure reveals the following:
Which of the following diagnostic studies is most likely to
demonstrate the cause of the headaches?
A. MRI of the head
B. MRI of the kidneyC. MRI of the thoraxD. 24-h urinary 5-HIAAE. 24-h urinary free cortisol
V-36.   The patient described in Question V-35 is most likely to
have which of the following associated cardiac abnormalities?
A. Bicuspid aortic valve
B. Mitral stenosisC. Preexcitation syndromeD. Right bundle branch blockE. Tricuspid atresia
V-37.   A 30-year-old female with a history of irritable bowel
syndrome presents with complaints of palpitations. Onfurther questioning, the symptoms occur randomlythroughout the day, perhaps more frequently after caf-feine. The primary sensation is of her heart “ﬂip-ﬂopping”in her chest. The patient has never had syncope. Her vitalsigns and exam are normal. An electrocardiogram is ob-tained, and it shows normal sinus rhythm with no otherabnormality. A Holter monitor is obtained and shows pre-mature ventricular contractions occurring approximatelysix times per minute. The next most appropriate step inher management is
A. referral to a cardiologist for electrophysiologic study
B. beta blocker administrationC. amiodarone administrationD. reassurance that this is not pathologicE. verapamil administration
V-38.   All the following ECG ﬁndings are suggestive of left
ventricular hypertrophy except
A. (S in V
1 + R in V 5 or V 6) >35 mm
B. R in aVL >11 mmC. R in aVF >20 mmD. (R in I + S in III) >25 mmE. R in aVR >8 mm
V-39.   A 27-year-old woman is hospitalized in the intensive
care unit (ICU) for Lyme disease. Complete heart block isnoted and a single-lead pacemaker is implanted. She isdischarged on a long course of antibiotics with a perma-nent pacemaker. She returns to see you in clinic complain-ing of inability to concentrate, fatigue, palpitations, andcough. On examination, her blood pressure is 121/72mmHg; heart rate 60 beats per minute, respiratory rate 18breaths per minute. She has an elevated jugular venouspressure with cannon awaves. She has rales on lung aus-
cultation and an S
3 on cardiac auscultation but no periph-
eral edema. Electrocardiogram (ECG) shows a ventricularpaced rate at 60/min with repolarization abnormalities.These ﬁndings are most consistent with
A. acute myocardial infarction
B. ICU psychosis syndromeC. Kearne-Sayer syndromeD. pacemaker syndromeE. pacemaker twiddler’s syndromeRight arm 185/115
Left arm 188/113Right thigh 100/60Left thigh 102/58V-37.   (Continued)
184 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-40.   Y ou are evaluating a new patient in clinic. He is a 72-
year-old man who had a myocardial infarction (MI) and
a stroke 3 years ago. He comes to your ofﬁce to establish aprimary care physician and because he ran out of medica-tions (metoprolol, aspirin, lovastatin, lisinopril) 1 weekago. He brings in with him an electrocardiogram (ECG)performed 1 year ago (below). Y ou obtain another tracingand it is not signiﬁcantly changed. Other than occasionalweakness in his right upper extremity, he has no com-plaint. He has not had any medications for 2 weeks.Which is the next most appropriate step?
A. Obtain chest radiograph in clinic today
B. Obtain a transthoracic echocardiogramC. Reﬁll medications and ask him to return to clinic in
6 months
D. Transfer him to the hospital for thrombolytic therapyE. Transfer him to the hospital for cardiac catheterization
V-41.   All the following disorders may be associated with
thoracic aortic aneurysm except
A. osteogenesis imperfectaB. Takayasu’s arteritisC. Ehlers-Danlos syndromeD. ankylosing spondylitisE. Klinefelter’s syndromeV-42.   All the following may cause elevation of serum tropo-
ninexcept
A. congestive heart failureB. myocarditisC. myocardial infarctionD. pneumoniaE. pulmonary embolism
FIGURE V-40  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
V-40.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 185
V-43.   What is the correct interpretation of this electrocar-
diogram (ECG) tracing?
A. Atrial ﬁbrillation
B. Complete heart block with junctional escape rhythmC. Idioventricular sinus arrhythmiaD. Mobitz Type 2 A V BlockE. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia
V-44.   A 44-year-old man with history of HIV infection is
brought to the Emergency Department by friends be-cause of an altered mental status. They note that he hasbeen coughing with worsening shortness of breath for thepast 2–3 weeks. His antiretroviral therapy includes a pro-tease inhibitor. In triage, his blood pressure is 110/74mmHg; heart rate 31 beats per minute, respiratory rate32, temperature 38.7°C, and oxygen saturation 74% onroom air. He appears well perfused. Chest radiographshows bilateral ﬂuffy inﬁltrates. An electrocardiogramshows sinus bradycardia without ST changes. A chest CTscan shows no pulmonary embolus. After initiating oxy-gen and establishing an airway, you direct your attentionto his bradycardia. Which is the most appropriate step atthis time?
A. Correct the oxygen deﬁcit, check an arterial blood
gas, and monitor closely
B. Glucagon to reverse the effects of protease inhibitors
C. T emporary transvenous pacemakerD. Urgent cardiac catheterization for percutaneous
coronary intervention
V-45.   A 55-year-old woman is undergoing evaluation of
dyspnea on exertion. She has a history of hypertensionsince age 32 and is also obese with a body mass index(BMI) of 44 kg/m
2. Her pulmonary function tests show
mild restrictive lung disease. An echocardiogram shows athickened left-ventricular wall, left-ventricular ejectionfraction of 70%, and ﬁndings suggestive of pulmonaryhypertension with an estimated right-ventricular systolicpressure of 55 mmHg, but the echocardiogram is techni-cally difﬁcult and of poor quality. She undergoes a rightheart catheterization that shows the following results:
What is the most likely cause of the patient’s dyspnea?
A. Chronic thromboembolic disease
B. Diastolic heart failureC. Obstructive sleep apneaD. Pulmonary arterial hypertensionE. Systolic heart failure
V-46.   Which of the following congenital cardiac disorders
will lead to a left-to-right shunt, generally with cyanosis?
A. Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from
the pulmonary trunk
B. Patent ductus arteriosus without pulmonary hyper-
tension
C. T otal anomalous pulmonary venous connection
D. Ventricular septal defectE. Sinus venosus atrial septal defectFIGURE V-43  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
Mean arterial pressure 110 mmHg
Left-ventricular end-diastolic pressure 25 mmHg
Pulmonary artery (PA) systolic pressure 48 mmHg PA diastolic pressure 20 mmHg
PA mean pressure 34 mmHg
Cardiac output 5.9 L/minV-43.   (Continued)
186 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-47.   Y ou are evaluating a new patient in clinic. On cardiac
auscultation, there is a high-pitched, blowing, decre-
scendo diastolic murmur heard best in the third intercos-tal space along the left sternal border. A second murmuris heard at the apex, which is a low-pitched rumblingmid-diastolic murmur. Sustained hand-grip increases theintensity of the murmurs. The murmurs are heard best atend-expiration. There are also an S
3 and a systolic ejec-
tion murmur. The left ventricular impulse is displaced tothe left and inferiorly. Radial pulses are brisk with aprominent systolic component. Blood pressure is 170/70mmHg, heart rate is 98 beats/min, respiratory rate 18breaths/min. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is obtained inclinic. Which of the following ﬁndings do you expect onthe ECG tracing for this patient?
A. Diffuse ST-segment elevation and PR-segment de-
pression
B. Inferior Q-waves
C. Left-ventricular hypertrophyD. Low voltageE. Right-atrial enlargement
V-48.   A 65-year-old male is seen in the emergency depart-
ment with palpitations. His symptoms began 30 min beforearrival. He has not had any dizziness, light-headedness, orchest pain. His past medical history is notable for a myocar-dial infarct 2 years ago, chronic atrial ﬁbrillation, and athree-vessel coronary artery bypass graft surgery 1 year ago.Medications include aspirin, metoprolol, warfarin, and li-sinopril. An electrocardiogram shows wide complex tachy-cardia at a rate of 170. Which of the following will provedeﬁnitively that his rhythm is ventricular tachycardia?
A. Hypotension
B. Cannon a waves
C. An odd electrocardiogram with similar QRS mor-
phology
D. Irregular rhythmE. Syncope
V-49.   Y ou have referred your patient for an exercise-electro-
cardiography stress test. The report indicates that hewalked for 7 min of the Bruce protocol and had no chestpain during or after the test. During the exercise, he hadmultiple premature ventricular complexes and reached90% of maximum predicted heart rate. He had 2-mm up-sloping ST-segment response during exercise. At the endof the protocol and during recovery, he had 1-mm ST-segment depressions, which lasted for 6 min. Blood pressurerose from 127/78 to 167/102 mmHg at maximal exertion.Which feature of this report is most suggestive of severe is-chemic heart disease and a high risk of future events?
A. Diastolic pressure >100 mmHg
B. Not achieving 95% of maximum predicted heart rateC. Persistent ST-segment depressions into recoveryD. Upsloping ST-segments during exerciseE. Ventricular ectopy during exerciseV-50.   A 45-year-old female who immigrated to the United
States 10 years ago from Peru presents with dyspnea onexertion for the last 4 months. She denies chest pain buthas noted signiﬁcant accumulation of ﬂuid in her abdo-men and lower extremity edema. She has a history of tu-berculosis, which was treated with a four-drug regimenwhen she was a child. Electrocardiography shows normalsinus rhythm but no other abnormality. A CT of thechest is obtained and shows pericardial calciﬁcations. Inaddition to an elevated jugular venous pressure and athird heart sound, which of the following is likely to befound on physical exam?
A. Rapid y descent in jugular venous pulsations
B. Double systolic apical impulse on palpationC. Loud, ﬁxed split P
2 on auscultation
D. Cannon a wave in jugular venous pulsations
E. An opening snap on auscultation
V-51.   During a yearly physical, a 55-year-old man is found to
have a systolic murmur. The murmur is mid-systolic andbegins shortly after S
1 and peaks in mid-systole. It is a low-
pitched, rough murmur heard best at the base of the heartin the right second intercostal space. There is radiation tothe carotids bilaterally. The rest of his physical examinationis unremarkable, and you make a presumptive diagnosis ofaortic stenosis. Laboratory data show a hemoglobin A1C of7.2%, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 45 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 144 mg/dL, and creatinine1.2 mg/dL. Blood pressure is 159/85 mmHg, heart rate is75 beats/min. Body mass index is 33 kg/m
2. What is the
most likely etiology of this patient’s aortic stenosis?
A. Age-related degeneration
B. DyslipidemiaC. Glucose intoleranceD. HypertensionE. Obesity
V-52.   All the following are associated with a high risk of
stroke in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation except
A. diabetes mellitusB. hypercholesterolemiaC. congestive heart failureD. hypertensionE. age over 65
V-53.   Y ou are asked to evaluate a 66-year-old male for preoper-
ative cardiovascular risk before the surgical removal of a 2-cm sigmoid colon cancer. The patient has an 80-pack-yearhistory of cigarette use but quit 6 months before this presen-tation. His past medical history is also signiﬁcant for hyper-tension and hypercholesterolemia. He has no past cardiachistory and has never received cardiac imaging or stress test-ing. He currently is taking lisinopril 20 mg/d, hydrochlo-rothiazide 25 mg/d, and pravastatin 20 mg/d. He has nottolerated atenolol in the past because of fatigue and de-creased libido. Functionally, the patient is quite healthy and
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 187
continues to play golf weekly while carrying his own golf bag.
He lives on the fourth ﬂoor of an apartment complex andprefers climbing the stairs to using the elevator. He has nolimiting dyspnea or chest pain. On physical examination thepatient appears his stated age and has a blood pressure of136/88. Heart rate is 90. Cardiovascular and pulmonary ex-aminations are normal. The patient has good peripheralpulses and no carotid bruits. His electrocardiogram revealsno evidence of prior ischemia or left ventricular hypertrophy,but he does have a right bundle branch block. What do youadvise the patient and his surgeon about his operative risk?
A. He should undergo cardiac stress testing with imag-
ing before surgery to rule out silent ischemia in the
setting of a right bundle branch block.
B. His hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and to-
bacco use place him in a high-risk surgical category,and he should undergo immediate cardiac catheter-ization before abdominal surgery.
C. Functional status is such that the patient can per-
form to greater than four metabolic equivalents, andthe patient has only one risk factor for predictingcardiovascular events. Thus, he can proceed to sur-gery without further investigation.
D. The patient should not receive preoperative meto-
prolol because he had a bad reaction to it in the past.
E. Because of his smoking history, the patient’s pulmo-
nary risk outweighs his cardiovascular risk.
V-54.   A 54-year-old man with hypercholesterolemia and
poorly controlled hypertension is admitted to the coro-nary care unit after coming to the emergency room withsudden chest pain. A coronary catheterization is per-formed, and complete occlusion of the posterior descend-ing artery is identiﬁed. Percutaneous intervention failsand the patient is medically managed. Two days later heappears to be acutely ill. Physical examination reveals anew murmur. Which of the following would account foran early decrescendo systolic murmur in this case?
A. Acute mitral regurgitation
B. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathyC. Chronic mitral regurgitationD. Severe aortic stenosisE. Ventricular septal rupture
V-55.   A 73-year-old female develops substernal chest pain,
severe nausea, and vomiting while mowing the lawn. Inthe emergency department she has cool extremities, rightarm and left arm blood pressure of 85/70 mmHg, heartrate of 65/min, clear lungs, and no murmurs. She has nourine output. A Swan-Ganz catheter is placed and revealscardiac index of 1.1 L/min per mm
2, PA pressure of 20/14
mmHg, PCW pressure of 6 mmHg, and RA pressure of24 mmHg. The patient most likely has
A. gram-negative sepsis
B. occlusion of the left main coronary arteryC. occlusion of the right coronary arteryD. perforated duodenal ulcerE. ruptured aortic aneurysm
V-56.   Which of the following patients with echocardio-
graphic evidence of signiﬁcant mitral regurgitation hasthe best indication for surgery with the most favorablelikelihood of a positive outcome?
A. A 52-year-old man with an ejection fraction of 25%,
NYHA class III symptoms, and a left-ventricular
end-systolic dimension of 60 mm
B. A 54-year-old man with an ejection fraction of 30%,
NYHA class II symptoms, and pulmonary hypertension
C. A 63-year-old man in sinus rhythm without symp-
toms, an ejection fraction of 65%, and a normalright heart catheterization
D. A 66-year-old man without symptoms, an ejection
fraction of 50%, and left-ventricular end-systolic di-mension of 45 mm
E. A 72-year-old asymptomatic woman with newly
discovered atrial ﬁbrillation, ejection fraction of60%, and end-systolic dimension of 35 mm
V-57.   Which of the following patients meets criteria for the
diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome?
A. A man with waist circumference of 110 cm, well-
controlled diabetes mellitus with fasting plasma
glucose of 98 mg/dL, and blood pressure of 140/75mmHg
B. A woman with triglycerides of 180 mg/dL, waist cir-
cumference of 75 cm, and polycystic ovary syndrome
C. A man with nonalcoholic liver disease, obstructive
sleep apnea, and blood pressure of 135/90 mmHg
D. A woman with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) of
54 mg/dL, blood pressure of 125/80 mmHg, andfasting plasma glucose of 85 mg/dL
V-58.   In the maternity ward, 2 days after assisted vaginal
delivery of a healthy boy, a 31-year-old African-Americanwoman has developed shortness of breath and wheezing.On examination, blood pressure is 113/78 mmHg, heartrate is 102, and regular and jugular venous pressures areelevated. Chest auscultation shows rales 2/3 bilaterallywithout evidence of consolidation. Cardiac examinationreveals an S
3. An echocardiogram shows a dilated left ven-
tricle with an ejection fraction of 30%. A diagnosis ofperipartum cardiomyopathy is made and she improveswith treatment. Which of the following factors is predic-tive of her risk for developing peripartum cardiomyopa-thy or mortality with subsequent pregnancies?
A. Age >30 years
B. African ancestryC. Interpartum left ventricular functionD. Male childE. Nadir ejection fractionV-55.   (Continued) V-53.   (Continued)
188 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-59.   A 55-year-old man complains of 6 months of short-
ness of breath. He has new dyspnea on exertion and three-
pillow orthopnea. Lung auscultation reveals rales 2/3 bi-laterally. He has 2+ pitting lower extremity edema. Jugularvenous pressure is estimated to be 14 cmH
20 measured at
a 45° angle. Chest radiograph reveals pulmonary inﬁl-trates and an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Electrocardiog-raphy shows low-voltage in the precordial and limb leads.An echocardiogram shows a dilated left ventricle, ejectionfraction of 20%, mild mitral regurgitation, and a smallpericardial effusion. Which ﬁnding on cardiac examina-tion would be consistent with this patient's diagnosis?
A. Absent S
2
B. Narrow pulse pressure
C. Paradoxical splitting of S 2 with inspiration
D. Pulsus bisferiens
V-60.   A 49-year-old male is found to have persistently elevated
total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) despitelifestyle modiﬁcation. Y ou prescribe an HMG-CoA reductaseinhibitor to reduce the risk of coronary events. This medica-tion will exert all the following beneﬁcial effects except
A. direct action on atheroma progressionB. improvement in endothelial-dependent vasomotionC. long-term reduction of serum LDLD. regression of existing coronary stenosisE. stabilization of existing atherosclerotic lesions
V-61.   Dipyridamole is often used during nuclear cardiac
stress tests. Based on the pathophysiology of myocardialischemia and the mechanism of action of dipyridamole,in which circumstance might the stress test underestimatethe degree of ischemic tissue?
A. Three-vessel high-grade obstruction
B. BradycardiaC. Left bundle branch blockD. OsteoarthritisE. Right coronary artery 99% occlusionV-62.   A 62-year-old female with a history of chronic left
bundle branch block is admitted to the coronary care unitwith 4 hours of substernal chest pain and shortness ofbreath. She has elevation of serum troponin-T. She receivesurgent catheterization with angioplasty and stent place-ment of a left anterior descending (LAD) artery lesion.Three days after admission she develops recurrent chestpain. Which of the following studies is most useful for de-tecting new myocardial damage since the initial infarction?
A. Echocardiogram
B. ElectrocardiogramC. Serum myoglobinD. Serum troponin-IE. Serum troponin-T
V-63.   A 38-year-old woman presents with complaints of fevers
and chest pain. She is noted to have a widened mediastinumon chest radiograph, and a diastolic murmur is present atthe lower left sternal border. She is hypertensive, with ablood pressure of 180/72 mmHg. All blood cultures are neg-ative on three occasions from separate anatomic sites drawn6 h apart. Further evaluation of the murmur demonstrates adilation of the aortic root to 4 cm with subsequent aortic re-gurgitation. She is diagnosed with aortitis. Which of the fol-lowing is the least likely cause of aortitis in this patient?
A. Ankylosing spondylitisB. Giant cell arteritisC. Rheumatoid arthritisD. SyphilisE. Takayasu’s arteritis
V-64.    Echocardiogram of a patient with this electrocardio-
gram (ECG) tracing is likely to show which of the following?
A. Catheter in the right ventricle
B. Focal hypokinesisC. Global hypokinesisD. Small pericardial effusionE. Thickened left ventricle
FIGURE V-64  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 189
V-65.   A 54-year-old male is brought to the emergency de-
partment with 1 hour of substernal crushing chest pain,
nausea, and vomiting. He developed the pain while playingsquash. The pain was improved with the administration ofsublingual nitroglycerine in the ﬁeld. His ECG is shownbelow. Emergent cardiac catheterization is most likely toshow acute thrombus in which of the following vessels?A. Left anterior descending coronary arteryB. Left circumﬂex coronary arteryC. Left main coronary arteryD. Obtuse marginal coronary arteryE. Right main coronary artery
V-66.   A 54-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment with chest pain. He has had three episodes ofchest pain in the past 24 h with exertion. Each haslasted 20–30 min and resolved with rest. His past medi-cal history is signiﬁcant for hypertension, hyperlipid-emia, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease. He currently smokes one pack/day of ciga-rettes. His family history is remarkable for early coro-nary artery disease in a sibling. Home medicationsinclude chlorthalidone, simvastatin, aspirin, albuterol,and home oxygen. In the emergency department, hebecomes chest pain–free after receiving three sublin-gual nitroglycerin tablets and IV heparin. ECG shows0.8-mm ST-segment depression in V
5, V 6, lead I and
aVL. Cardiac biomarkers are negative. An exercise stress
test shows inducible ischemia. Which aspects of this pa-tient’s history add to the likelihood that he might havedeath, myocardial infarction (MI), or urgent revascu-larization in the next 14 days?
A. Age
B. Aspirin usageC. Beta-agonist usageD. Diuretic usageV-67.   A 62-year-old woman presents to your ofﬁce with
dyspnea of 4 months duration. She has a history of mono-clonal gammopathy of unclear signiﬁcance (MGUS) andhas been lost to follow-up for the past 5 years. She is ableto do only minimal activity before she has to rest but hasno symptoms at rest. She has developed orthopnea but de-nies paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She complains of fa-tigue, light headedness, and lower extremity swelling. Onexamination, blood pressure is 110/90 mmHg and heartrate 94. Jugular venous pressure is elevated, and the jugularvenous wave does not fall with inspiration. An S
3 and S 4
are present, as well as a mitral regurgitation murmur. Thepoint of maximal impulse is not displaced. Abdominal ex-amination is signiﬁcant for ascites and a large, tender, pul-satile liver. Chest radiograph shows bilateral pulmonaryedema. An electrocardiogram shows an old left bundlebranch block. Which clinical features differentiate con-strictive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy?
A. Elevated jugular venous pressure
B. Kussmaul’s signC. Narrow pulse pressureD. Pulsatile liverE. None of the aboveFIGURE V-65
V-65.   (Continued)
190 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-68.   This electrocardiogram (ECG) is obtained from a 47-
year-old man after an exercise stress test. Which of the
following additional tests would be important to obtainat this point?A. 18-lead ECGB. Chest CT scan with IV contrastC. Chest radiographD. Erythrocyte sedimentation rateE. Rhythm strip analysis
V-69.   All of the following are potential causes of tricuspid
regurgitation except
A. congenital heart diseaseB. infective endocarditisC. inferior wall myocardial infarctionD. pulmonary arterial hypertensionE. rheumatic heart diseaseF. all will cause tricuspid regurgitation
V-70.   A 45-year-old man is evaluated following an episode
of syncope. He has had occasional chest pain with exer-tion. T oday, while he was climbing a ﬂight of stairs in hishome, he abruptly lost consciousness and fell two steps.His wife was home with him and heard the fall. He re-gained consciousness rapidly prior to arrival of emer-gency medical services but has no memory of the event.He is being treated for a broken radius that occurred dur-ing the fall. He has no history of childhood illnesses orprevious history of heart murmur. His physical activityhas not been limited until recently, because of anginalsymptoms for which he has not sought evaluation. He hasno history of hypertension or hypercholesterolemia anddoes not smoke. He last saw a physician about 8 years agofor a job-related physical examination and was told hishealth was good. Y ou are asked to evaluate for a possiblecardiac cause of syncope. On physical examination, hisblood pressure is 160/90 mmHg and heart rate is 88beats/min. He has a IV/VI harsh crescendo-decrescendomidsystolic murmur. His carotid upstroke is delayed. Hiselectrocardiogram shows left-ventricular hypertrophywith a strain pattern. Y ou suspect aortic stenosis. What isthe most likely cause of aortic stenosis in this individual?
A. Bicuspid aortic valve
B. Calciﬁcation of the aortic valveC. Congenital aortic stenosisD. Rheumatic fever
V-71.   All of the following statements regarding cardiac
transplantation are true except
A. Most transplant programs routinely perform en-
domyocardial biopsies on a routine schedule for 5years to detect acute transplant rejection.
B. Patients requiring inotropic support with a pulmo-
nary artery catheter or mechanical circulatory sup-port (left- or right-ventricular assist device) aregiven highest priority for transplantation.
C. The average posttransplant “half-life” for a trans-
planted heart is 9.3 years.
D.  The most common cause of late mortality (>1 year)
following cardiac transplantation is coronary arterydisease.
E. While the survival following heart transplantation is
76% at 3 years, most patients are unable to return tounrestricted functional status after heart transplant.
FIGURE V-68  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
V-68.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 191
V-72.   Y ou are managing a patient with the metabolic syn-
drome. She is an obese woman with poorly controlled dia-
betes and dyslipidemia. Her HbA1C is 8.8% and fastingplasma glucose is 195 mg/dL. Low-density lipoprotein(LDL) cholesterol is 98 mg/dL and triglycerides are 276mg/dL. Her medications include insulin, atorvastatin, hy-drochlorothiazide, and aspirin. What is the best option fora medication to treat this patient’s hypertriglyceridemia?
A. Cholestyramine
B. ColestipolC. EzetimibeD. FenoﬁbrateE. Nicotinic acid
V-73.   All of the following statements regarding percutane-
ous coronary interventions (PCI) accompanied by stent-ing for ischemic heart disease are true except
A. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is preferred
over PCI in patients with isolated left main artery disease.B. Compared to balloon angioplasty, PCI with stent-
ing has higher target vessel patency rates at 6months.
C. Drug-eluting stents delay endothelial healing and
expose the patient to an increased risk of subacutestent thrombosis compared to bare metal stents.
D. PCI with stenting reduces the occurrence of coro-
nary death and myocardial infarction (MI) in pa-tients with symptomatic ischemic heart disease.
V-74.   Y ou are evaluating a new patient with chronic pain
syndrome. This electrocardiogram (ECG) is obtainedin clinic. What medication is contraindicated in thispatient?
A. Codeine
B. FentanylC. GabapentinD. Methadone
V-75.   When treating a patient with a non-ST-segment ele-
vation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), risk stratiﬁcationand timely administration of anti-ischemic and anti-thrombotic therapies are paramount. For a patient withunstable angina with negative biomarkers, which medica-tion regimen is most appropriate as initial treatment?
A. Aspirin, beta blocker, spironolactone, HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitor (statin)
B. Aspirin, clopidogrel, nitroglycerin, beta blocker, heparin
C. Aspirin, nitroglycerin, beta blocker, heparin, glyco-
protein IIB/IIIa inhibitor
D. Aspirin, morphine, oxygen, nitratesV-76.   All the following are true about cardiac valve replace-
ment except
A. Bioprosthetic valve replacement is preferred to me-
chanical valve replacement in younger patients be-cause of the superior durability of the valve.
B. Bioprosthetic valves have a low incidence of throm-
boembolic complications.
C. The risk of thrombosis with mechanical valve re-
placement is higher in the mitral position than inthe aortic position.
D. Mechanical valves are relatively contraindicated in
patients who wish to become pregnant.
FIGURE V-74  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6
V-73.   (Continued)
192 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
E. Double-disk tilting mechanical prosthetic valves of-
fer superior hemodynamic characteristics over sin-
gle-disk tilting valves.
V-77.   A 35-year-old female undergoes a physical examination
while obtaining new insurance coverage. She reports 1 yearof slowly progressive dyspnea on exertion and a change inskin color. Her physical examination is notable for the pres-ence of cyanosis, an elevated jugular venous pulse, a ﬁxedsplit loud second heart sound, and peripheral edema. Arte-rial oxygen saturation is 84%. Chest radiography shows anenlarged heart and normal lung parenchyma. T en years ago,at her last insurance physical examination, her physical ex-amination, oxygen saturation, and chest radiogram werenormal. Echocardiography most likely will reveal
A. atrial septal defect
B. Ebstein’s anomalyC. tetralogy of FallotD. truncus arteriosusE. ventricular septal defect
V-78.   A 66-year-old man has a history of ischemic cardio-
myopathy. He undergoes right and left heart catheteriza-tion for evaluation of unexplained dyspnea on exertionand an equivocal result on noninvasive cardiac stresstesting. Sample tracings from his right and left heartcatheterization at rest and during exercise are shown.What abnormality is demonstrated in the pulmonarycapillary wedge tracing?
A. Aortic stenosis
B. Congestive heart failureC. Mitral regurgitationD. Mitral stenosisE. Pulmonary arterial hypertension
V-79.   A 28-year-old female has hypertension that is difﬁ-
cult to control. She was diagnosed at age 26. Since thattime she has been on increasing amounts of medication.Her current regimen consists of labetalol 1000 mg bid,lisinopril 40 mg qd, clonidine 0.1 mg bid, and amlodipine5 mg qd. On physical examination she appears to bewithout distress. Blood pressure is 168/100, and heartrate is 84 beats per minute. Cardiac examination is unre-markable, without rubs, gallops, or murmurs. She hasgood peripheral pulses and has no edema. Her physicalappearance does not reveal any hirsutism, fat maldistri-bution, or abnormalities of genitalia. Laboratory studiesreveal a potassium of 2.8 mEq/dL and a serum bicarbon-ate of 32 mEq/dL. Fasting blood glucose is 114 mg/dL.What is the likely diagnosis?
A. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
B. Fibromuscular dysplasiaC. Cushing’s syndromeD. Conn’s syndromeE. PheochromocytomaV-80.   What is the best way to diagnose this disease?
A. Renal vein renin levelsB. 24-h urine collection for metanephrinesC. Magnetic resonance imaging of the renal arteriesD. 24-h urine collection for cortisolE. Plasma aldosterone/renin ratio
V-81.   Y ou are evaluating a new patient in clinic. The 25-year-
old patient was diagnosed with “heart failure” in anotherstate and has since relocated. He has New Y ork Heart Asso-ciation class II symptoms and denies angina. He presentsfor evaluation and management. On review of systems, thepatient has been wheel-chair bound for many years andhas severe scoliosis. He has no family history of hyperlipid-emia. His physical examination is notable for bilateral lungcrackles, an S
3, and no cyanosis. An electrocardiogram
(ECG) is obtained in clinic and shows tall R waves in V 1
and V 2 with deep Qs in V 5 and V 6. An echocardiogram re-
ports severe global left ventricular dysfunction with re-duced ejection fraction. What is the most likely diagnosis?FIGURE V-78020406080100120140Pressure (mmHg)
020406080100120140160Pressure (mmHg)LVLV
PCWPCWRadial
Rest ExerciseV-77.   (Continued) V-76.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 193
A. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
B. Atrial septal defectC. Chronic thromboembolic diseaseD. Duchenne’s muscular dystrophyE. Ischemic cardiomyopathy
V-82.   Which of the following congenital heart defects
causes ﬁxed splitting of the second heart sound?
A. Atrial septal defect
B. Epstein’s anomalyC. Patent foramen ovaleD. T etralogy of FallotE. Ventricular septal defect
V-83.   In chronic severe aortic regurgitation, the left ventri-
cle adapts to maintain cardiac output. Left-ventricularhypertrophy occurs over time and maintains cardiac out-put in the face of increased preload. All of the followingare adverse effects of left ventricular hypertrophy except
A. decreased coronary blood ﬂowB. equalization of aortic and left-ventricular pressures
in end-diastole
C. increased myocardial oxygen consumptionD. increased wall stress
V-84.   A 41-year-old patient is referred to you for evaluation
of a cardiac murmur. The patient has a diastolic murmurwith a rumbling quality, with an opening snap heard bestat the left-ventricular apex. An electrocardiogram showsthe patient to be in sinus rhythm with evidence of leftatrial enlargement. A two-dimensional echocardiogramshows mitral stenosis with an estimated valve area of 1.7cm
2 indicative of mild mitral stenosis. When deciding on
whether or not to correct this patient’s valvular heart dis-ease, which of the following tests is indicated?
A. Coronary arteriogram
B. Coronary CT angiogramC. Exercise stress testD. Right heart catheterizationE. 24-h Holter monitor
V-85.   A 35-year-old woman comes in for a routine visit.
Her past medical history is signiﬁcant for poorly con-trolled type 2 diabetes mellitus (HbA1C of 8.4%), ob-structive sleep apnea, hypertension, and dyslipidemia.Her body mass index is 42 kg/m
2. Blood pressure in clinic
is 154/87 mmHg and fasting plasma glucose is 130 mg/dL. Her medications include metformin, insulin, rami-pril, hydrochlorothiazide, and atorvastatin. Y ou have di-agnosed her with the metabolic syndrome. Based on ourcurrent understanding of the metabolic syndrome, treat-ing which of the following underlying conditions is theprimary approach to treating this disorder?
A. Hyperglycemia 
B. HypercholesterolemiaC. HypertensionD. Inﬂammatory cytokinesE. Obesity
V-86.   A 24-year-old man is referred to cardiology after an
episode of syncope while playing basketball. He has no
recollection of the event, but he was told that he collapsedwhile running. He awakened lying on the ground andsuffered multiple contusions as a result of the fall. He hasalways been an active individual but recently has devel-oped some chest pain with exertion that has caused himto restrict his activity. His father died at age 44 while rockclimbing. He believes his father’s cause of death was sud-den cardiac death and recalls being told his father had anenlarged heart. On examination, the patient has a III/VImid-systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur. His elec-trocardiogram shows evidence of left ventricular hyper-trophy. Y ou suspect hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as thecause of the patient’s heart disease. Which of the follow-ing maneuvers would be expected to cause an increase inthe loudness of the murmur?
A. Handgrip exercise
B. SquattingC. StandingD. Valsalva maneuverE. A and BF. C and D
V-87.   A patient is noted to have a crescendo-decrescendo
mid-systolic murmur on examination. The murmur isloudest at the left sternal border. The patient is asked tosquat, and the murmur decreases in intensity. The patientstands and the murmur increases. Finally, the patient isasked to perform a Valsalva maneuver and the murmurincreases in intensity. Which of the following is mostlikely to be the cause of this murmur?
A. Aortic stenosis
B. Chronic mitral regurgitationC. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HOCM)D. Mitral valve prolapseE. Pulmonic stenosis
V-88.   Y ou are asked to give medical clearance for a 75-year-
old male before an elective carotid endarterectomy. Hispast medical history is signiﬁcant for hypercholesteremiaand hypertension. He also has diet-control diabetes mel-litus. Current medications include simvastatin and hy-drochlorothiazide. He denies any current or prior cardiacsymptoms and has never had a myocardial infarction.Physical examination is unrevealing with the exception ofa right carotid bruit. An electrocardiogram is unremark-able with the exception of premature ventricular contrac-tions (PVCs) at a rate of two to three per minute.Laboratory analysis is unremarkable, including normalrenal function and liver function tests. Oxygen satura-V-85.   (Continued) V-81.   (Continued)
194 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
tions are also normal. What would be the expected seri-
ous complication rate (perioperative MI, pulmonaryedema, or ventricular tachycardia) in this patient?
A. <0.1%
B. 0.1–1.0%C. 1.0–3.0%D. 3.0–10%E. 10%
V-89.   Which of the following disorders is not associated
with ventricular tachycardia as a cause of syncope?
A. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
B. Prior myocardial infarctionC. Atrial myxomaD. Aortic valvular stenosisE. Congenital long QT syndrome
V-90.   A 20-year-old female is seen in the emergency de-
partment with symptoms of severe periodic headaches,sweating, and nausea with vomiting. She also complainsof feeling light-headed with standing. Her blood pressureon presentation is 240/136, with a heart rate of 92. Onstanding, the patient has a blood pressure of 204/98, witha heart rate of 136. On ophthalmologic examination thepatient has mild blurring of the optic discs without hem-orrhage. The examination is otherwise normal. What isthe best medication for the management of this patient’shypertension?
A. Phentolamine
B. FenoldopamC. EsmololD. NicardipineE. Diazoxide
V-91.   What test would best determine the patient’s diagnosis?A. Plasma catecholaminesB. 24-h urine collection for 5-hydroxy-indoleacetic
acid
C. Abdominal CT scanD. 24-h urine collection for metanephrines and vanil-
lylmandelic acid
E. Adrenal vein sampling for renin levels
V-92.   Which of the following statements about cardiovas-
cular disease in the United States is correct?
A. Death secondary to cardiovascular disease remains
higher in men compared to women.
B. Dysfunction of the coronary microcirculation is
more common in men than women.
C. The prevalence of cardiovascular disease is ~25% in
individuals >75 years.
D. While age-adjusted cardiovascular deaths are declin-
ing in the United States, hospital admissions for car-
diovascular disease and congestive heart failurecontinue to rise.
E. Women are more likely than men to present with
symptoms of chest pain with nausea, vomiting, anddiaphoresis.
V-93.   A 40-year-old male with diabetes and schizophrenia
is started on antibiotic therapy for chronic osteomyelitisin the hospital. His osteomyelitis has developed just un-derlying an ulcer where he has been injecting heroin. Heis found unresponsive by the nursing staff suddenly. Hiselectrocardiogram is shown here. The most likely cause ofthis rhythm is which of the following substances?
A. Furosemide
B. MetronidazoleC. DroperidolD. MetforminE. Heroin
FIGURE V-93
V-91.   (Continued) V-88.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 195
V-94.   Normal sinus rhythm is restored with electrical car-
dioversion. A 12-lead electrocardiogram is notable for a
prolonged QT interval. Besides stopping the offendingdrug, the most appropriate management for this rhythmdisturbance should include intravenous administrationof which of the following?
A. Amiodarone
B. LidocaineC. MagnesiumD. MetoprololE. Potassium
V-95.   A 52-year-old man with a history of stable angina pre-
sents to the hospital with 30 min of chest pain. He reportsthat over the past 2 weeks, he has developed his typical an-ginal symptoms of chest pressure radiating to his jaw andleft arm with progressively less exertion. He has been usingsublingual nitroglycerin more frequently. His other medi-cation includes a beta blocker, aspirin, and lovastatin. Onthe day of admission, he developed pain at rest that was notrelieved with three nitroglycerin tablets. On examination,he is anxious and short of breath. His vital signs are notablefor a blood pressure of 140/88 mmHg; a heart rate of 110/min, and a respiratory rate of 25/min. He has bilateralcrackles halfway up both lung ﬁelds and has a 3/6 systolicmurmur that radiates to his axilla. His electrocardiogramshows 3-mm ST-segment depression in leads V
3–V5. In ad-
dition to his outpatient medications, all of the followingadditional therapies are indicated except
A. cardiac catheterizationB. clopidogrelC. enoxaparinD. eptiﬁbatideE. tissue plasminogen activator
V-96.   Which of the following patients with aortic dissec-
tion can be managed without surgical or endovascular in-tervention?
A. A 72-year-old male with a dissection of the descending
aorta that begins just distal to the left subclavian artery
and extends to below the left renal artery and with abaseline creatinine of 1.8 mg/dL that is not increasing
B. A 41-year-old male with an ascending aortic dissec-
tion that extends past the left common carotid ar-tery after an automobile accident
C. A 42-year-old male with Marfan’s syndrome with a
distal aortic dissection beginning just below the leftsubclavian artery and an aortic root of 53 mm
D. A 72-year-old male with a chronic type B dissection
with a CT that shows advancement of the dissectionat 6 months
E. A 56-year-old male with a descending aortic dissec-
tion that encompasses the origin of the renal and il-iac arteries with rest claudication
V-97.   Based on the electrocardiogram below, treating which
condition might speciﬁcally improve this patient’s tachycardia?
A. Anemia
B. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)C. Myocardial ischemiaD. Pain
FIGURE V-97  I
  II
  III
  II  aVR
  aVL
  aVF  V1
  V2
  V3  V4
  V5
  V6V-95.   (Continued)
196 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
V-98.   Each of these patients is alert and oriented and has a
blood pressure of 110/60. In which patient would adeno-
sine constitute appropriate initial therapy?
A. A 65-year-old male with no ischemic heart disease
and wide complex tachycardia
B. A 65-year-old female with known ischemic disease
and narrow complex tachycardia
C. A 25-year-old female with known preexcitation syn-
drome and narrow complex tachycardia
D. A 28-year-old male with known preexcitation syn-
drome and wide complex tachycardia
E. A 44-year-old male with atrial ﬁbrillation without a
prior history of heart disease
V-99.   A 68-year-old man with a history of coronary artery
disease is seen in his primary care clinic for complaint
of cough with sputum production. His care provider isconcerned about pneumonia, so a chest radiograph isordered. On the chest radiograph, the aorta appears tor-tuous with a widened mediastinum. A contrast-enhancedCT of the chest conﬁrms the presence of a descendingthoracic aortic aneurysm measuring 4 cm with no evi-dence of dissection. What is the most appropriate man-agement of this patient?
A. Consult interventional radiology for placement of
an endovascular stent.
B. Consult thoracic surgery for repair.
C. No further evaluation is needed.D. Perform yearly contrast-enhanced chest CT and refer
for surgical repair when the aneurysm size is >4.5 cm.
E. Treat with beta blockers, perform yearly contrast-
enhanced chest CT, and refer for surgical repair ifthe aneurysm grows more than 1 cm/year.
V-100.   A 55-year-old male presents with severe subster-
nal chest pain for the last hour. It began at rest and isassociated with dyspnea and nausea. The electrocar-diogram shows bradycardia with a Mobitz type II sec-ond-degree block. Chest plain ﬁlm is normal. Which ofthe following is likely to be found in addition on theelectrocardiogram?
A. ST elevation V
1–V3
B. Wellen’s T waves
C. ST elevation II, III, and aVFD. ST depression in I and aVLE. No other abnormality
V-101.   A 44-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room complaining of acute onset of chest pain. Shedescribes the chest pain as 10/10 in intensity, with asharp stabbing quality. The chest pain is worse whenlying ﬂat and better when sitting upright. The paincame on suddenly, awakening the patient from sleep.There is no radiation of the pain and no nausea, vom-iting, or lightheadedness. She has no other complaints.She has no history of hypertension, hypercholesterol-emia, or diabetes mellitus. She does not smoke. Onphysical examination, she appears in distress movingin bed frequently. Her vital signs are: temperature38.3°C, blood pressure 112/62 mmHg, heart rate 102beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, and Sa
O2
100% on room air. She has a regular tachycardia.There are no murmurs, rubs, or gallops. There is nopulsus paradoxus. The pulmonary, abdominal, ex-tremity, and neurologic examinations are normal. Anechocardiogram demonstrates a normal ejection frac-tion without an effusion. Initial troponin I level is 0.26ng/mL (normal values <0.06–0.50 ng/mL). What is themost appropriate treatment for this patient? (See alsoFigure V-64.)
A. Anticoagulation with heparin and serial troponin
measurements
B. Immediate cardiac catheterization with angioplasty
and stent
C. Indomethacin, 50 mg three times daily
D. Reassurance onlyE. Reteplase, 10 units IV now, followed by an addi-
tional dose in 30 min
V-102.   A 22-year-old man collapses immediately after be-
ing hit in the chest with a ball while playing lacrosse.Emergency medical personnel were present during thegame and noted the initial rhythm to be ventricular ﬁbril-lation. The patient underwent prompt deﬁbrillationwithin 3 min, and normal sinus rhythm was restored. Thepatient has been transported to the emergency room andis stable with a blood pressure of 128/76 mmHg and heartrate of 112 beats/min. He has no prior history of syncopeand no family history of sudden cardiac death. His elec-trocardiogram (ECG) is normal. There is no evidence ofbroken ribs or sternum by x-ray. What is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Brugada syndrome
B. Cardiac contusionC. Commotio cordisD. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathyE. Right ventricular dysplasia
V-103.   Y ou are examining a new patient in clinic. On car-
diac auscultation you palpate a double apical impulse.There is a III/VI harsh crescendo “diamond-shaped”murmur that begins well after the ﬁrst heart sound.The murmur is best heard at the lower left sternal bor-der as well as at the apex. The murmur does not radiateto the neck. There is no respiratory variation. S
1 and S 2
are normal. With passive elevation of the legs, the mur-mur decreases in intensity. During the strain phase ofthe Valsalva maneuver, the murmur increases in inten-sity. With inhalation of amyl nitrate, the murmur in-creases in intensity. What is the etiology of this patient'smurmur?V-101.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 197
A. Aortic sclerosis
B. Aortic stenosisC. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathyD. Mitral regurgitationE. Tricuspid regurgitation
V-104.   Insulin resistance and fasting hyperglycemia are im-
portant when creating a treatment program for the meta-bolic syndrome. Often, lifestyle modiﬁcations will occurat the same time medications are prescribed. In address-ing the treatment of insulin resistance and fasting hyper-glycemia, which of the following statements is true?
A. Metformin is more effective than the combination
of weight reduction, dietary fat restriction, and in-
creased physical activity for the prevention of diabe-tes mellitus.
B. Metformin is superior to other drug classes for in-
creasing insulin sensitivity.
C. Thiazolidinediones, but not metformin, improve in-
sulin-mediated glucose uptake in muscle.
D. Lifestyle interventions alone are not effective in re-
ducing the incidence of diabetes mellitus.
V-105.   A 63-year-old male with end-stage ischemic cardio-
myopathy is offered a heart transplant from a 20-year-oldfemale with brain death after a skiing accident. Which ofthe following is not a risk that the patient should be ad-vised about if he decides to accept the heart?
A. Increased risk of malignancy
B. Risk of rejection of transplanted organC. Coronary artery diseaseD. Increased risk of infectionsE. Increased risk of bradyarrhythmias
V-106.   A 38-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment with chest pain. He has had chest pressure forthe past 2 days. He has never had this pain before. Atbaseline, his exercise tolerance is normal, but he has lim-ited his activity in the past few days due to fear of exacer-bating the chest pain. The pain has been present for mostof the past 48 h. In the emergency department, he has anormal blood pressure, heart rate is 104 beats perminute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute; oxygensaturation 91% on room air. Lung auscultation is clearbilaterally. Cardiac examination reveals tachycardia butno other signiﬁcant ﬁndings. Laboratory data show awhite blood cell count of 9000/ µL, CK is 190 U/L; CK-
MB 8 µg/L; and troponin 0.7 ng/mL. Electrocardiogram
(ECG) shows tachycardia, a rightward axis, left ventricu-lar hypertrophy, and T-wave inversions in V
2 and V 3. An
old ECG is not available for comparison. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Esophageal spasm
B. MyocarditisC. Non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarctionD. Pulmonary embolismE. Unstable angina
V-107.   All the following interventions have demonstrated a
decrease in macrovascular complications (coronary ar-tery disease, stroke) in patients with diabetes and dyslipi-demia except
A. ACE inhibitorsB. gemﬁbrozil therapyC. goal blood pressure below 130/85D. HMG-CoA reductase therapyE. tight glycemic control
V-108.   Pulsus paradoxus can be described by which of the
following statements?
A. Pulsus paradoxus can be seen in patients with acute
asthma exacerbations in which the negative intra-
thoracic pressure decreases afterload of the heartwith a resultant increase in systolic pressure duringinspiration.
B. Pulsus paradoxus has not been described in patients
with superior vena cava syndrome.
C. Pulsus paradoxus describes the ﬁnding of dimin-
ished pulses during inspiration, when the peripheralpulse is normally augmented during inspiration.
D. A drop in systolic pressure during inspiration of
more than 5 mmHg indicates the presence of pulsusparadoxus.
E. Pulsus paradoxus occurs during cardiac tamponade
when there is an exaggeration of the normal decreasein the systolic blood pressure during inspiration.
V-109.   A 35-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital
with malaise, weight gain, increasing abdominal girth,and edema. The symptoms began about 3 months agoand gradually progressed. The patient reports an increasein waist size of ~15 cm. The swelling in her legs has gottenincreasingly worse such that she now feels her thighs areswollen as well. She has dyspnea on exertion and two-pillow orthopnea. She has a past history of Hodgkin’s dis-ease diagnosed at age 18. She was treated at that time withchemotherapy and mediastinal irradiation. On physicalexamination, she has temporal wasting and appearschronically ill. Her current weight is 96 kg, an increase of11 kg over the past 3 months. Her vital signs are normal.Her jugular venous pressure is ~16 cm, and the neck veinsdo not collapse on inspiration. Heart sounds are distant.There is a third heart sound heard shortly after aorticvalve closure. The sound is short and abrupt and is heardbest at the apex. The liver is enlarged and pulsatile. Ascitesis present. There is pitting edema extending throughoutthe lower extremities and onto the abdominal wall.Echocardiogram shows pericardial thickening, dilatationof the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins, and abruptcessation of ventricular ﬁlling in early diastole. EjectionV-106.   (Continued) V-103.   (Continued)
198 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
fraction is 65%. What is the best approach for treatment
of this patient?
A. Aggressive diuresis only
B. Cardiac transplantationC. Mitral valve replacementD. Pericardial resectionE. Pericardiocentesis
V-110.   A 52-year-old man is brought to the emergency
room complaining of shortness of breath, chest pain, anddizziness. The chest pain began acutely about 90 min ago.He had been working in the yard at that time and thoughthe might have strained a muscle in his chest. He took anaspirin and lay down, but the symptoms worsened. Hesoon developed dizziness and shortness of breath. Hecalled 911, and upon arrival to the emergency room, hewas found to be hypotensive and tachycardic. His vitalsigns on presentation were: blood pressure 75/44 mmHg,heart rate 132 beats/min, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min,and Sa
O2 88% on room air. On physical examination, he
appears in distress and is diaphoretic. He is unable tospeak in full sentences. His neck veins appear distended.There are crackles throughout both lung ﬁelds. The heartsounds are regular and tachycardic. There is no edema.The extremities are cool, and the pulses are thready. Anelectrocardiogram shows ST elevations in lead V2–V6.Chest radiograph shows diffuse pulmonary edema.Emergency cardiac catheterization is scheduled, and it isestimated that the catheterization laboratory will beavailable in ~45 min. The patient remains hypotensivewith a blood pressure that is now 68/38 mmHg, and theoxygen saturation has fallen to 82% on room air. What isthe best management for the patient’s hypotension?
A. Aortic counterpulsation
B. Dobutamine, 2.5 µg/kg per min IV
C. Furosemide, 40 mg IVD. Metoprolol, 5 mg IVE. Norepinephrine, 4 µg/min IV
V-111.   A 64-year-old woman is admitted to the emer-
gency room with hypotension and chest pain. Hersymptoms began 30 min ago, awakening the patientfrom sleep. She vomited twice and has felt dizzy andlightheaded. Upon arrival in the emergency room, herblood pressure was 80/40 mmHg, with a heart rate of 64beats/min. She appears in distress and has another epi-sode of emesis in the emergency room. The lungs areclear to auscultation. Pulses are thready. An electrocar-diogram demonstrates elevations in leads II, III, andaV
F. There are ST depressions in V 1 and V 2. The rhythm
is sinus with occasional premature ventricular contrac-tions. A chest radiograph is clear. An echocardiogramshows normal left ventricular function and right ven-tricular dilatation. What is the best immediate treat-ment for this patient’s hypotension?A. Aortic counterpulsationB. Dobutamine, 5 µg/kg per min
C. Dopamine, 5 µg/kg per min
D. Normal saline bolus, 500 mLE. Transvenous pacemaker placement
V-112.   All of the following statements regarding sudden
cardiac death in the United States are true except
A. A strong parental history of sudden cardiac death as
a presenting history of coronary artery disease in-creases the likelihood of a similar presentation in anoffspring.
B. An estimated 50% of all cardiac deaths are sudden
and unexpected.
C. As many as 70–75% of men who die of sudden car-
diac death have evidence of acute myocardial infarc-tion (MI), while only 20–30% have preexistinghealed MIs.
D. By 5 min after sudden cardiac arrest, the estimated
survival rates are no better than 25–30% in the out-of-hospital setting.
V-113.   A 64-year-old man suddenly collapses while playing
the sousaphone with his alumni band during halftime ofa football game. Emergency medical services with train-ing in advanced cardiac life support are present within 2min of collapse. Initial rhythm on cardiac monitor is ven-tricular ﬁbrillation. What is the ﬁrst step in the treatmentof this patient?
A. Continue cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for
a full 5 min prior to attempting deﬁbrillation
B. Endotracheal intubation followed by rapid deﬁbril-
lation
C. Immediate deﬁbrillation at 300–360 J once, followed
by CPR for 60–90 s before additional deﬁbrillation
D. Obtain IV access and administer amiodarone, 150 mg
E. Obtain IV access and administer epinephrine, 1 mg
V-114.   Which of the following therapies has been demon-
strated to improve survival to hospital discharge with fa-vorable neurologic outcome in out-of-hospital cardiacarrest?
A. Amiodarone
B. EpinephrineC. HypothermiaD. Time to initial deﬁbrillation <10 minE. Vasopressin
V-115.   A 65-year-old man is evaluated for chest pain. Given
the characteristics of his chest pain, it is decided that heshould undergo cardiac stress testing. He has a history ofmyocardial infarction involving the left anterior descend-ing artery 2 years ago, for which he received reteplase withrestoration of coronary ﬂow. His adenosine technetiumV-111.   (Continued) V-109.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 199
99m nuclear stress test is shown in Figure V-115 (Color
Atlas). What abnormality is indicated by the arrows?
A. Apical aneurysm
B. Fixed defect of the anteroapical wallC. Reversible ischemia of the anteroapical wallD. Tissue attenuation due to obesity
V-116.   A 54-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment with chest pain. He has had three episodes ofchest pain in the past 24 h with exertion. Each has lasted20–30 min and resolved with rest. His past medical his-tory is signiﬁcant for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, as-thma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Hecurrently smokes one pack/day of cigarettes. His familyhistory is remarkable for early coronary artery disease ina sibling. Home medications include chlorthalidone,simvastatin, aspirin, albuterol, and home oxygen. In theemergency department, he becomes free of chest painafter receiving three sublingual nitroglycerin tablets andIV heparin. Electrocardiogram shows 0.8mm ST-segmentdepression in leads V
5, V6, I, and aV L. Cardiac biomark-
ers are negative. An exercise stress test shows inducibleischemia. Which aspects of this patient’s history add tothe likelihood that he might have death, myocardial in-farction (MI) or urgent revascularization in the next 14days?
A. Age
B. Aspirin useC. Beta-agonist useD. Diuretic use
V-117.   A 38-year-old man presents to the emergency de-
partment with chest pain. He has had substernal chestpressure for the past 2 days. He has never had this painbefore. At baseline, his exercise tolerance is normal, buthe has limited his activity in the past few days due to fearof exacerbating the chest pain. The pain has beenpresent for most of the past 48 h. In the emergency de-partment, he has a normal blood pressure; heart rate is104 beats/min, respiratory rate 22 breaths/min, oxygensaturation 91% on room air. Lung auscultation is clearbilaterally. Cardiac examination reveals tachycardia butno other signiﬁcant ﬁndings. Laboratory data show awhite blood cell count of 9000/ µl, CK is 190, CK-MB 8
µg/mL, troponin 0.9 µg/mL. Electrocardiogram (ECG)
shows tachycardia, a rightward axis, left ventricular hy-pertrophy, and T-wave inversions in V
2 and V 3. An old
ECG is not available for comparison. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Esophageal spasm
B. MyocarditisC. Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarctionD. Pulmonary embolismE. Unstable anginaV-118.   Y ou are called to the bedside to see a patient with
Prinzmetal’s angina who is having chest pain. The pa-tient had a cardiac catheterization 2 days prior showinga 60% stenosis of the right coronary artery with associ-ated spasm during coronary angiogram. The spasm wasrelieved with nitroglycerin infusion. Which of the fol-lowing additional disorders is the patient most likely tohave?
A. Migraine
B. Peptic ulcer diseaseC. Peripheral vascular diseaseD. Reactive arthritisE. Rheumatoid arthritis
V-119.   A 56-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for
newly diagnosed heart failure. On cardiac examinationhis pulse is irregular, he has an S
3, and a laterally dis-
placed point of maximal impulse. There is a high-pitchedholosystolic murmur beginning with the ﬁrst heart soundand extending to the second heart sound heard best in theaxilla. Neurologic examination shows decreased sensa-tion to pin prick in a stocking-glove distribution. Electro-cardiogram (ECG) shows atrial ﬁbrillation, low voltage inthe limb leads, and ﬁrst-degree atrioventricular blockwithout evidence of prior myocardial infarction. Chestradiograph shows cardiomegaly. Blood chemistries showpotassium 4.1 meq/L, magnesium 1.6 mg/dL, creatinine0.8 mg/dL, calcium 11.4 mg/dL, albumin 3.7 mg/dL, totalprotein 8.4 mg/dL, AST 27 U/L, ALT 17 U/L, alkalinephosphatase 76 U/L. An echocardiogram is performed.Which ﬁnding on echocardiogram is most likely?
A. Akinesis of the inferior wall
B. Aortic stenosisC. Protrusion of the left ventricular apex with hyper-
contractility of the base
D. Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valveE. Thickened interatrial septum
V-120.   A cardiac biopsy is obtained from a 24-year-old
man with new-onset heart failure during a right heartcatheterization. Congo red staining shows positive bire-fringence characteristic of amyloid. Immunohistochemi-cal staining of the biopsy reveals an abundance of thetransthyretin protein. What is the next step in the man-agement of this type of amyloidosis?
A. Bone marrow biopsy
B. Evaluation for underlying inﬂammatory diseaseC. Family pedigree analysisD. Neurocognitive testingE. Urine for Bence-Jones protein
V-121.   Y ou are caring for a patient with heart rate-related
angina. With minor elevations in heart rate, the patienthas anginal symptoms that impact his quality of life. Onreview of a 24-h Holter monitor, it appears that the pa-V-115.   (Continued)
200 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
tient has sinus tachycardia at the time of his symptoms.
What is the mechanism for this patient’s arrhythmia?
A. Delayed afterdepolarizations
B. Early afterdepolarizationsC. Increased automaticityD. Reentry pathway
V-122.   Where are the most common drivers of atrial ﬁbril-
lation anatomically located?
A. Left atrial appendage
B. Mitral annulusC. Pulmonary vein oriﬁceD. Sinus venosusE. Sinus node
V-123.   Symptoms of atrial ﬁbrillation vary dramatically
from patient to patient. A patient with which of the follow-ing clinical conditions will likely be the most  symptomatic
(e.g., short of breath) if they develop atrial ﬁbrillation?
A. Acute alcohol intoxication
B. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathyC. HyperthyroidismD. HypothermiaE. Postoperative after thoracotomy
V-124.   When deciding whether to initiate anticoagulation
for a patient with atrial ﬁbrillation, which of the follow-ing factors is least important?
A. AgeB. History of diabetesC. Mitral stenosisD. Use of antiarrhythmic medicationsE. Hypertension
V-125.   Which of the following electrocardiographic ﬁnd-
ings suggests a focal atrial tachycardia as opposed to anautomatic atrial tachycardia (e.g., sinus tachycardia)?
A. Initiation of tachycardia with programmed stimulation
B. One P-wave morphologyC. Slow-onset and termination phaseD. Slowing of the rate with adenosine infusion
V-126.   Y ou are seeing a return patient in clinic. The patient
is a 76-year-old man with a history of hypertension, re-mote cerebrovascular accident, diet-controlled diabetes,and congestive heart failure with left ventricular systolicdysfunction (ejection fraction = 30%). The patient re-ports no new complaints and feels well. On physical ex-amination, you palpate an irregular pulse, and anelectrocardiogram veriﬁes atrial ﬁbrillation. The patientdoes not have a history of atrial ﬁbrillation. Y ou and thepatient are interested in a trial of direct current cardiover-sion (DCCV). What is the appropriate management ofanticoagulation for this patient?A. Initiate warfarin (with goal INR 2.0–3.0) following
DCCV only if cardioversion is unsuccessful.
B. Give full-dose aspirin (325 mg daily) 3 weeks prior
to DCCV , perform transesophageal echocardiogram(TEE) and DCCV (if not contraindicated), then dis-continue aspirin if DCCV is successful.
C. Initiate IV heparin and warfarin, perform trans-
esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) and DCCV (ifnot contraindicated), then discontinue warfarin ifDCCV is successful.
D. Initiate IV heparin, perform TEE and DCCV (if not
contraindicated), then continue warfarin for at least1 month.
V-127.   Y ou are evaluating a patient with a wide-complex
tachycardia. The patient has a history of Wolff-Parkin-son-White (WPW) syndrome. Which medication is themost effective for treating this patient’s tachycardia?
A. Adenosine
B. DigoxinC. DiltiazemD. ProcainamideE. Verapamil
V-128.   All of the following are electrocardiographic clues
supporting the diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia except
A. capture beatsB. concordance of QRS complex in all precordial leadsC. fusion beatsD. QRS duration during tachycardia shorter than dur-
ing sinus rhythm
E. RSR' pattern in V
1
V-129.   A 68-year-old man with a history of myocardial in-
farction and congestive heart failure is comfortable at rest.However, when walking to his car, he develops dyspnea,fatigue, and sometimes palpitations. He must rest for sev-eral minutes before these symptoms resolve. His New Y orkHeart Association classiﬁcation is which of the following?
A. Class I
B. Class IIC. Class IIID. Class IV
V-130.   The husband of a 68-year-old woman with conges-
tive heart failure is concerned because his wife appears tostop breathing for periods of time when she sleeps. He hasnoticed that she stops breathing for ~10 s and then fol-lows this with a similar period of hyperventilation. Thisdoes not wake her from sleep. She does not snore. Shefeels well rested in the morning but is very dyspneic witheven mild activity. What is your next step in management?
A. Electroencephalography
B. Maximize heart failure managementV-126.   (Continued) V-121.   (Continued)
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 201
C. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
during sleep
D. Obtain a sleep study
E. Prescribe bronchodilators
V-131.   A 28-year-old man with long-standing cardiomyop-
athy presents with worsening dyspnea. Physical examina-tion reveals a blood pressure of 85/50 mmHg, heat rate of112 beats/min, elevated jugular venous pressure, positivehepatojugular reﬂex, quiet S
1/S2, apical S 3, no pulmonary
rales, and 3+ lower extremity edema. Chest radiographshows no pulmonary edema and a small left-sided pleuraleffusion. What information does the patient’s pulmonaryexamination give you in regards to his likely pulmonarycapillary wedge pressure?
A. It is likely to be elevated.
B. It is likely to be normal.C. It is likely to be decreased.D. No information.
V-132.   All of the following ﬁndings on echocardiographic
assessment of patients with congestive heart failure withpreserved ejection fraction are relevant except
A. atrial ﬁbrillationB. left atrial dilatationC. left ventricular wall thicknessD. left ventricular diastolic ﬁlling as measured by tissue
Doppler
E. systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve
V-133.   All of the following medications have been shown to
worsen heart failure in patients with left ventricular sys-tolic dysfunction exceptA. angiotensin receptor blockersB. calcium channel antagonistsC. nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs)D. sotalolE. thiazolidinediones
V-134.   Which of the following is true regarding dose esca-
lation of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-tors and beta blockers in patients newly diagnosed withcongestive heart failure?
A. ACE inhibitors should be escalated on a daily basis
to maximal tolerated doses, while beta blockers
should be gently increased in dose over weeks, astolerated.
B. Beta blockers should be escalated on a daily basis to
maximal tolerated doses, while ACE inhibitorsshould be gently increased in dose over weeks, astolerated.
C. Both should be escalated rapidly to maximally toler-
ated doses.
D. Both should be escalated slowly to maximally toler-
ated doses.
E. Both should be initiated at full doses.
V-135.   In African Americans with New Y ork Heart Asso-
ciation class II heart failure, which of the followingdrug combinations should be added to an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and beta blocker?
A. Hydralazine/angiotensin receptor blockers
B. Hydrazaline/digoxinC. Isosorbide dinitrate/angiotensin receptor blockersD. Isosorbide dinitrate/digoxinE. Isosorbide dinitrate/hydralazineV-133.   (Continued) V-130.   (Continued)
202V . DISORDERS OF THE 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
ANSWERS
V-1. The answer is C.   (Chap. 241)   Several factors have been shown to confer an increased
risk of complications from hypertension. In the patient described here there is only one:
ongoing tobacco use. Epidemiologic factors that have poorer prognosis include African-American race, male sex, and onset of hypertension in youth. In addition, comorbid fac-tors that independently increase the risk of atherosclerosis worsen the prognosis in pa-tients with hypertension. These factors include hypercholesterolemia, obesity, diabetesmellitus, and tobacco use. Physical and laboratory examination showing evidence of endorgan damage also may portend a poorer prognosis. This includes evidence of retinaldamage or hypertensive heart disease with cardiac enlargement or congestive heart fail-ure. Furthermore, electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia or left ventricular strain butnot left ventricular hypertrophy alone may predict worse outcomes. A family history ofhypertensive complications does not worsen the prognosis if diastolic blood pressure ismaintained at less than 110 mmHg.
V-2. The answer is B.   (Chap. 242)   Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) affect 1 to 2% of
men older than age 50. Most AAAs are asymptomatic and are found incidentally on phys-ical examination. The predisposing factors for AAA are the same as those for other car-diovascular disease, with over 90% being associated with atherosclerotic disease. MostAAAs are located infrarenally, and recent data suggest that an uncomplicated infrarenalAAA may be treated with endovascular stenting instead of the usual surgical grafting. In-dications for proceeding to surgery include any patient with symptoms or an aneurysmthat is growing rapidly. Serial ultrasonography or CT imaging is imperative, and all aneu-rysms larger than 5.5 cm warrant intervention because of the high mortality associatedwith repair of ruptured aortic aneurysms. The rupture rate of an AAA is directly relatedto size, with the 5-year risk of rupture being 1 to 2% with aneurysms less than 5 cm and20 to 40% with aneurysms more than 5 cm. Mortality of patients undergoing elective re-pair is 1 to 2% and is greater than 50% for emergent treatment of a ruptured AAA. Pre-operative cardiac evaluation before elective repair is imperative as coexisting coronaryartery disease is common.
V-3. The answer is A.   (Chap. 233)   This patient is presenting with symptoms of congestive
heart failure with evidence of systemic embolization. The physical examination suggestsmitral valve stenosis with a positional low-pitched sound heard when the patient is in theupright position. This is characteristic of a “tumor plop,” which should alert the physicianto the possibility of a cardiac tumor. This is conﬁrmed by the echocardiogram revealing alarge left atrium tumor, which is most likely an atrial myxoma. Myxomas are the mostcommon type of benign primary cardiac tumors, accounting for over three-quarters ofsurgically resected cardiac tumors. Myxomas generally present in between ages 20 and 50and are seen more commonly in women. The clinical presentation of myxomas resemblesthat of valvular heart disease due either to obstruction of ﬂow from the tumor obscuringvalvular ﬂow or to regurgitation due to abnormal valve closure. The tumor plop is heardin mid-diastole and results from the impact of the tumor against the valve or ventricularwall. Most tumors are solid masses located in the atria and measure 4–8 cm. They usuallyarise from the interatrial septum near the fossa ovalis. Histologically, they appear as gelati-nous structures with scattered myxoma cells embedded in a glycosaminoglycan stromalmatrix. They may embolize and can be mistaken for endocarditis, particularly as systemic
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 203
symptoms, including fevers and weight loss, may be seen. Echocardiogram is useful to
document tumor size and site of attachment. MRI or CT scanning may also be utilized forpreoperative planning. However, cardiac catheterization is no longer considered manda-tory prior to tumor resection, especially as catheterization of the chamber containing thetumor increases the likelihood of embolization. Primary surgical excision is the treatmentof choice and should be performed regardless of tumor size as even small tumors cancause embolization or valvular obstruction. Surgical resection is generally curative withonly a 1–2% recurrence rate in sporadic cases. Tumors metastatic to the heart are morecommon than primary cardiac tumors and occur with the highest incidence in metastaticmelanoma. However, by absolute numbers of cases, breast and lung cancer account for thelargest number of cases. Cardiac metastases usually occur in patients with known malig-nancies, are usually not the cause of presentation, and are found incidentally. Only 10%are clinically apparent at the time of presentation, and most are found at autopsy.
V-4. The answer is A.   (Chap. 237)   Myocardial ischemia is determined by the balance be-
tween myocardial oxygen supply and demand. Myocardial oxygen demand (MV•
O2)  is de-
termined by heart rate, myocardial contractility, and myocardial wall tension. A normaloxygen supply to the myocardium requires adequate inspired oxygen, intact lung func-tion (including diffusion capacity, which is abnormal in emphysema), normal hemoglo-bin concentration and function, and normal coronary blood ﬂow. The resistance tocoronary blood ﬂow is determined by three vascular regions: large epicardial arteries,pre-arteriolar vessels, and arteriolar and intramyocardial capillaries. In the absence ofsigniﬁcant ﬂow-limiting atherosclerosis, the resistance in the epicardial arteries is negligi-ble. The major determinant of coronary-resistance is due to the pre-arteriolar, arteriolar,and intramyocardial capillary vessels.
V-5. The answer is B.   (Chap. 225)   Second-degree A V block type 1 (Mobitz type 1) is char-
acterized by a progressive lengthening of the PR interval preceding a pause. The pause inthis tracing is between the third and fourth QRS complex. First-degree A V block is aslowing of conduction through the A V junction and is diagnosed when the PR interval>200 ms. Type 2 second-degree A V block is characterized by intermittent failure of con-duction of the P wave without changes in the preceeding PR or RR intervals. Second-degree A V block type 2 usually occurs in the distal or infra-His conduction systems.
V-6. The answer is C.   (Chap. 221)   The electrocardiographic T wave represents myocardial
repolarization, and its conﬁguration can be altered nonspeciﬁcally by metabolic abnor-malities, drugs, neural activity, and ischemia through a dispersion effect on the activationor repolarization of action potentials. Although myocardial ischemia and subendocardialinfarction can produce deep, symmetric T-wave inversions which would result in tachy-arrhythmias and syncope, noncardiac phenomena such as intracerebral hemorrhage cansimilarly affect ventricular repolarization. Hyperkalemia is manifested by tall peaked Twaves, not inverted ones. Hypocalcemia is manifested by prolonged QT intervals.
V-7. The answer is A.   (Chap. 230)   Aortic stenosis (AS) may remain asymptomatic for many
years. However, once symptoms develop, surgery is indicated owing to the increasedmortality associated with symptomatic AS. The average time to death after onset ofsymptoms is as follows: angina pectoris, 3 years; syncope, 3 years; dyspnea, 2 years; con-gestive heart failure, 1.5–2 years. In addition, surgery is advocated when the ejection frac-tion falls below 50% or when severe calciﬁcation, rapid progression, or expected delays insurgery are present. There is no speciﬁc age cut-off or degree of left-ventricular functionthat precludes surgical correction. This is, in part, due to the fact that there are no goodmedical therapies to treat aortic stenosis. Percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty has beenused as a bridge to surgery and in patients with severe left-ventricular dysfunction orwho are otherwise too ill to tolerate surgery. Improving blood pressure will not improvethis patient’s symptomatic AS, and vasodilation to an excessive degree can precipitatesyncope in these patients due to having a ﬁxed cardiac output. Further characterizationof the patient’s AS will not alter management. An exercise regimen is likely to result inmore episodes of syncope.
204 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
V-8. The answer is C.   (Chap. 229)   The ductus arteriosus is an embryonic vessel connecting
the pulmonary artery to the aorta just distal to the left subclavian artery, shunting blood
from the ﬂuid-ﬁlled lungs of the fetus. After birth, the ductus arteriosus closes as bloodnow circulates through the low-resistance pulmonary vascular bed. If the ductus arterio-sus fails to close after birth, a left-to-right shunt develops between the aorta and the pul-monary vasculature. Because the pressure in the aorta is greater than that of thepulmonary artery through all portions of the cardiac cycle, the murmur of a patent duc-tus arteriosus is a continuous murmur. There is late systolic accentuation of the murmurat the upper left sternal angle. The murmur is described as “machinery”-like, and often apalpable thrill is present. If Eisenmenger syndrome occurs, as in this patient, the shuntchanges directional ﬂow and becomes a right-to-left shunt as a result of pulmonary hy-pertension. That is when patients will become cyanotic. Because of the anatomic locationof the ductus arteriosus below the level of the left subclavian artery, a characteristic ofEisenmenger syndrome in those with patent ductus arteriosus is cyanosis and clubbing ofthe toes but not the ﬁngers. T otal anomalous pulmonary venous return occurs when allfour pulmonary veins drain into the systemic venous circulation. This condition is fatalsoon after birth if there is not also an atrial or ventricular septal defect or a patent fora-men ovale. Most patients with this condition are identiﬁed shortly after birth because ofcyanosis. Coarctation of the aorta is a relatively common congenital abnormality that isassociated with a stricture of the aorta near the insertion site of the ligamentum arterio-sus (the remnant of the ductus arteriosus). A patient with coarctation of the aorta fre-quently presents with headache. Upper extremity hypertension is present in associationwith low blood pressures in the lower extremities. Patients may also complain of claudi-cation in the lower extremities. T etralogy of Fallot is a congenital heart disease syndromewith ventricular septal defect, right-ventricular outﬂow obstruction, aortic override ofthe ventricular septal defect, and right-ventricular hypertrophy. This defect is almost al-ways identiﬁed and corrected during childhood. Ventricular septal defect results in left-to-right shunt and a holosystolic murmur rather than a continuous murmur.
V-9. The answer is A.   (Chap. 230)   In the post-MI setting, posterior (mural) mitral valve
chordae rupture is more common than aortic (anterior) mitral valve rupture due to itssingular blood supply. In contrast to functional mitral regurgitation, the regurgitant jetof valvular mitral regurgitation (MR) is eccentric and directed towards one wall of theatrium. The musical quality of the murmur has been described when the cause is a ﬂailleaﬂet. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve is a ﬁnding on echocardiogramwhen MR is associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Acute ventricular septal de-fect can be seen within the ﬁrst few days of an MI. These patients usually have hypoten-sion and rapidly develop pulmonary hypertension and signs of cardiogenic shock. In thepost-MI setting, ventricular free wall rupture into the pericardium is a catastrophic eventthat can cause tamponade and shock. Respiratory variation in mitral inﬂow velocity is anechocardiographic sign of tamponade physiology. High-frequency ﬂuttering of the ante-rior mitral leaﬂet is the characteristic echocardiographic ﬁnding of acute aortic regurgi-tation, seen most commonly in primary aortic valvular disease, aortic dissection,infective endocarditis, or chest trauma.
V-10. The answer is D.   (Chap. 242)   This patient presents with severe chest pain that is tear-
ing in quality and associated with hypertension. These symptoms should raise the con-cern for aortic dissection as the cause of the chest pain, and prompt evaluation andtreatment are essential to decrease mortality from this often fatal condition. In thepresence of an aortic regurgitation murmur and ECG changes consistent with myocar-dial injury, an ascending aortic dissection should be considered with dissection of theright coronary artery. Aortic dissections are classiﬁed by either the DeBakey or Stan-ford classiﬁcations. The DeBakey system classiﬁes aortic dissections into three types.Type I is caused by an intimal tear in the ascending aorta and has propagated to includethe descending aorta. A type II dissection involves only the ascending aorta, and a typeIII dissection involves only the descending aorta. The Stanford classiﬁcation has onlytwo categories: type A, which involves the ascending aorta, and type B, which involves
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 205
only the descending aorta. Risk factors for developing an aortic dissection include sys-
temic hypertension (70%), Marfan syndrome, inﬂammatory aortitis, congenital valveabnormalities, coarctation of the aorta, and trauma. Aortic dissections are a medicalemergency with a high in-hospital mortality due to aortic rupture, pericardial tampon-ade, or visceral ischemia. Ascending aortic dissections have the highest mortality, andstudies have demonstrated that medical management alone in an ascending aortic dis-section has a mortality rate of >50% ( PG Hagan et al, JAMA 283:897, 2000 ). The great-
est mortality occurs early after presentation with the mortality reported at 1–2% perhour initially after symptoms onset ( CA Nienaber ,KA Eagle ,Circulation 108: 628,
2003). Because of the high associated mortality, it is imperative to evaluate and treataggressively with early surgical intervention. Transesophageal echocardiography has80% sensitivity for diagnosing ascending aortic dissections and will also provide infor-mation regarding valvular function and presence of pericardial tamponade. CT angiog-raphy and MRI both have sensitivities for diagnosing aortic dissection of >90%. Thedecision regarding which test to perform should be based on the rapid availability oftesting and clinical stability of the patient. Management of an aortic dissection initiallybegins with medical therapy to stabilize the patient and decrease blood pressure. Thisshould be occurring concurrently with surgical consultation to plan deﬁnitive opera-tive repair on an emergent basis. Medical therapy should consist of antihypertensivetherapy to rapidly reduce the systolic blood pressure to 100–120 mmHg. Most oftenthis is accomplished with nitroprusside. In addition, use of a beta blocker to reducecardiac contractility and heart rate is recommended. Surgery involves excision of theintimal ﬂap, removal of the intramural hematoma, and placement of a graft. In somecases, replacement of the entire aortic root and aortic valve is necessary when the aorticvalve is involved. With coronary artery involvement, coronary artery bypass may alsobe required. With prompt surgical intervention, mortality from ascending aortic dis-section is ~15–25%.
V-11. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 231 and 244)   This patient presents with classic ﬁndings of
right-sided heart failure. The differential diagnosis includes pulmonary vascular disease,restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis, cor pulmonale, and any cause oflongstanding left-sided heart failure. A CT or MRI of the chest would assess for pericar-dial calciﬁcations or parenchymal lung disease not visualized on radiography. Iron stud-ies are a component of the evaluation for hemochromatosis, and fat pad biopsy is acomponent of the evaluation for amyloidosis, both of which may cause restrictive cardio-myopathy. The tuberculin test is useful for ascertaining the presence of prior infectionwith Mycobacterium tuberculosis , which is associated with the development of constric-
tive pericarditis. A coronary angiogram would not be helpful in a young patient with nophysical signs or echocardiographic ﬁndings of left-sided heart failure.
V-12. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 221 and e19)   This ECG shows a short ST segment that is
most prominent in V
2, V3, V4, and V 5. Hypercalcemia, by shortening the duration of re-
polarization, abbreviates the total time from depolarization through repolarization. Thisis manifested on the surface ECG by a short QT interval. In this scenario, the hypercalce-mia is due to the rhabdomyolysis and renal failure. Fluids and a loop diuretic are an ap-propriate therapy for hypercalcemia. Hemodialysis is seldom indicated. Hemodialysis isindicated for signiﬁcant hyperkalemia, which may also develop after rhabdomyolysis,manifest by “tenting” of the T waves or widening of the QRS. Classic ECG manifestationsof a pulmonary embolus (S
1, Q 3, T3 pattern) are infrequent in patients with pulmonary
embolism (PE), though the changes may be seen with massive PE. There are no signs ofmyocardial ischemia on this ECG, which would make coronary catheterization and 18-lead ECG interpretation of low yield.
V-13. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 235 and 350)   This patient meets the criteria for the metabolic
syndrome. These patients with type 2 diabetes and an abnormal lipid proﬁle have insulinresistance and a marked increase in cardiovascular risk. The LDL in these patients maynot be markedly elevated, but the particles are smaller and denser. These small LDL par-
206 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
ticles are thought to be more atherogenic than are normal LDL particles. Patients with
the metabolic syndrome have reduced HDL levels. Elevated serum endothelin levels maycontribute to hypertension, and elevated homocysteine levels have been suggested as acardiovascular risk factor.
V-14. The answer is A.   (Chap. 220)   The presentation of this patient is consistent with the di-
agnosis of acute valvular dysfunction due to infective endocarditis. The presence of awidened pulse pressure and diastolic murmur heard best along the lower sternal bordersuggests aortic regurgitation. The ﬁgure shown below in panel C shows a typical bisfer-
iens pulse that is characteristic of aortic regurgitation. With a bisferiens pulse, there aretwo distinct pulsations that can be palpated with systole. The initial pulse represents anexaggerated percussion wave reﬂecting the increased stroke volume that occurs in aorticregurgitation, with the second peak reﬂecting the tidal, or anacrotic, wave.
Infective endocarditis causes loss of valvular integrity and acutely causes valvular regur-
gitation. Of the other options, both mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation(choice E) would cause systolic and not diastolic murmurs. A hyperkinetic pulse may occurin these conditions, particularly if associated with fever or sepsis. With a hyperkinetic pulseClinical Identiﬁcation of the Metabolic Syndrome—Any Three Risk Factors
Risk Factor Deﬁning Level
Abdominal obesitya
Men (waist circumference)b>102 cm (>40 in.)
Women >88 cm (>35 in.)
Triglycerides >1.7 mmol/L (>150 mg/dL)
HDL cholesterol
Men <1.0 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL)Women <1.3 mmol/L (<50 mg/dL)
Blood pressure ≥130/≥85 mmHg
Fasting glucose >6.1 mmol/L (>110 mg/dL)
aOverweight and obesity are associated with insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome. However,
the presence of abdominal obesity is more highly correlated with the metabolic risk factors than is an
elevated body-mass index (BMI). Therefore, the simple measure of waist circumference is recom-mended to identify the BMI component of the metabolic syndrome.
bSome male patients can develop multiple metabolic risk factors when the waist circumference is only
marginally increased, e.g., 94–102 cm (37–39 in.). Such patients may have a strong genetic contributionto insulin resistance. They should beneﬁt from life-style changes, similarly to men with categorical in-creases in waist circumference.
FIGURE V-14 Schematic diagrams of the configurational 
changes in carotid pulse and their differential diagnoses. Heart 
sounds are also illustrated. A. Normal. A2, aortic component of 
the second heart sound; S1, first heart sound; S4, atrial sound. 
B. Anacrotic pulse with a slow initial upstroke. The peak is close 
to S2. These features suggest fixed left ventricular outflow obstruc-
tion, such as occurs with valvular aortic stenosis. C. Pulsus bisfe-
riens with both percussion and tidal waves occurring during systole. This type of carotid pulse contour is most frequently ob-served in patients with hemodynamically significant aortic regur-gitation or combined aortic stenosis and regurgitation with dominant regurgitation. It is rarely appreciated at the bedside by palpation. D. In hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, the 
pulse wave upstroke rises rapidly and the trough is followed by a smaller slowly rising positive pulse. E. A dicrotic pulse results 
from an accentuated dicrotic wave and tends to occur in patients with sepsis, severe heart failure, hypovolemic shock, cardiac tam-ponade, and aortic valve replacement. [From K Chatterjee: Bedside 
evaluation of the heart: The physical examination, in Cardiology: An Illustrated Text/Reference, K Chatterjee, W Parmley (eds). Philadel-phia, JB Lippincott, 1991.]

V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 207
the usual dichrotic notch is more pronounced as seen in panel E  of the ﬁgure. Mitral steno-
sis causes a diastolic murmur but is not a common lesion associated with infective endo-
carditis, unless underlying valvular stenosis was present prior to acquiring the infection. Itis not associated with a bisferiens pulse. Aortic stenosis is associated with pulsus parvus ettardus, with a delayed and prolonged carotid upstroke as shown here in panel B of the ﬁg-
ure. Aortic stenosis has an associated harsh crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur.
V-15. The answer is B.   (Chap. 232)   This patient presents with pericardial tamponade. These
patients often have distant heart sounds and on examination typically have pulsus para-doxus. Jugular veins are distended and typically show a prominent x descent and an ab-
sent y descent, as opposed to patients with constrictive pericarditis. In addition,
Kussmaul’s sign is absent in tamponade but present in constrictive pericarditis. The elec-trocardiogram is normal or shows low voltage. Rarely, electrical alternans may bepresent. Echocardiographic ﬁndings typically reveal right atrial collapse and right ven-tricular diastolic collapse. Cardiac catheterization will reveal equalization of diastolicpressures across the cardiac chambers. Therefore, the pulmonary capillary wedge pres-sure will be equal to the diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure, and this will be equal tothe right atrial pressure. These catheterization ﬁndings are also present in a patient withconstrictive pericarditis.
V-16. The answer is A.   (Chap. 237)   Calcium channel blockers are potent coronary vasodila-
tors, which also reduce myocardial oxygen demand, contractility, and arterial pressure.When beta blockers are ineffective or poorly tolerated, calcium channel blockers are in-dicated for the treatment of stable angina. Adverse effects of the calcium channel block-ers include hypotension, conduction disturbances, and the propensity to exacerbateheart failure due to the negative inotropic effects. In general, verapamil should not beused in conjunction with beta blockers because of the combined effect on heart rate andcontractility. Diltiazem should not be used in patients taking beta blockers with conduc-tion disturbances and a low ejection fraction. Immediate-release nifedipine and othershort-acting dihydropyridines should be avoided due to the increased risk of precipitat-ing myocardial infarction. Amlodipine and other second-generation dihydropyridinesdilate coronary arteries and decrease blood pressure. In conjunction with beta blockers,which slow heart rate and decrease contractility, amlodipine has a favorable effect in thetreatment of angina.
V-17. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 118 and 230)   Indications for endocarditis prophylaxis with
procedures are assessed by taking into account the nature of the cardiac lesion and therisk posed by the procedure. High-risk cardiac lesions include prosthetic heart valves, ahistory of bacterial endocarditis, complex cyanotic congenital heart disease, patent duc-tus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta, and surgically constructed systemic portal shunts.Moderate-risk patients include those with congenital cardiac malformations other thanhigh-risk or low-risk lesions, acquired aortic or mitral valve dysfunction, hypertrophiccardiomyopathy with asymmetric septal hypertrophy, and mitral valve prolapse withvalve thickening or regurgitation. Low-risk lesions include isolated secundum atrial sep-tal defect (ASD), a surgically repaired ASD, ventricular septal defect (VSD), patent duc-tus arteriosis (PDA), prior coronary bypass graft, mitral valve prolapse withoutregurgitation or thickened valves, a history of rheumatic fever without valvular dysfunc-tion, and cardiac pacemakers or implantable deﬁbrillators. This patient falls into themoderate-risk category. Her procedure is an esophageal dilation, which, like dental pro-cedures, calls for prophylaxis in the moderate- to high-risk groups. Amoxicillin 2 g PO 1h before the procedure is the standard recommendation, but this patient may be penicil-lin-allergic. Acceptable alternatives include clarithromycin 500 mg PO 1 h before the pro-cedure, clindamycin 600 mg PO 1 h before, or cephalexin 2 g PO 1 h before if the patientis able to tolerate cephalosporins.
V-18. The answer is D.   (Chap. 22)   The patient presents with carotid hypersensitivity syn-
drome in which pressure on the carotid sinus baroreceptors results in activation of thesympathetic nervous system with subsequent bradycardia caused by sinus arrest or atrio-
208 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
ventricular block, vasodilation, or both. Generally, men older than 50 are at risk for this
condition, and it classically presents with syncope in the setting of shaving, wearing atight collar, or turning the head to one side. Diagnosis is suggested by carotid sinus mas-sage with prolonged (more than 3 s) asystole.
V-19. The answer is D.   (Chap. 238)   Prinzmetal and colleagues described a syndrome of an-
gina that occurs at rest but not usually with exertion associated with transient ST-segmentelevation. The pathophysiology is due to coronary artery vasospasm. Proximal nonob-structive coronary plaques are usually present. The vasospasm usually occurs within 1 cmof a coronary plaque and is associated with ST-segment elevations on the 12-lead surfaceelectrocardiogram. Due to further vasospasm, cold water ingestion may exacerbate thepatient’s symptoms. Costochondritis or muscular strain can reproduce the patient’s pain.By deﬁnition, Prinzmetal’s angina is associated with ST-segment elevation, not depres-sion, during the anginal episode.
V-20. The answer is E.   (Chap. 242)   Aortitis and ascending aortic aneurysms are commonly
caused by cystic medial necrosis and mesoaortitis that result in damage to the elastic ﬁ-bers of the aortic wall with thinning and weakening. Many infectious, inﬂammatory, andinherited conditions have been associated with this ﬁnding, including syphilis, tubercu-losis, mycotic aneurysm, Takayasu’s arteritis, giant cell arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, andthe spondyloarthropathies (ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, Reiter’s syndrome,Behçet’s disease). In addition, it can be seen with the genetic disorders Marfan’s syn-drome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
V-21. The answer is C.   (Chap. 206)   This patient presents with the classic ﬁndings of chronic
Chagas’ disease with cardiomyopathy. Chagas’ disease, or American trypanosomiasis, isdue to infection with Trypanosoma cruzi  and only occurs in the Americas. Acute Chagas’
disease is usually a mild illness. A minority of chronically infected patients develop seri-ous cardiac or gastrointestinal disease (megaesophagus or megacolon). This diagnosisshould be considered in a person from Central or South America presenting with this de-gree of cardiomyopathy with conduction delays (most commonly right bundle branchblock) and normal angiogram. Apical aneurysm and thrombus formation are commonand may lead to systemic embolization, including stroke. Although medical therapy foracute Chagas’ improves mortality, the role in chronic Chagas’ has not been proven. Treat-ment for coronary vasospasm and aggressive lipid lowering therapy do not have an estab-lished role in the treatment of Chagas’ disease. Since the cardiomyopathy is consideredirreversible, cardiac transplantation is the only viable option to improve function. Theprognosis after cardiac transplantation tends to be favorable since this form of chronicChagas’ disease is usually limited to the heart. Many forms of acute viral myocarditis orstress cardiomyopathy are expected to improve with time.
V-22. The answer is A.   (Chap. 230)   This patient has the opening snap, diastolic rumble, and
signs of pulmonary hypertension indicative of mitral stenosis (MS). The most commoncause is sequelae of rheumatic carditis, and symptoms of stenosis usually develop twodecades after the onset of carditis. MS can remain asymptomatic for many years but beexaggerated when there is tachycardia, increased left-ventricular ﬁlling pressure, or re-duced cardiac output (e.g., fever, excitement, anemia, atrial ﬁbrillation, pregnancy, orthyrotoxicosis). Due to elevated left atrial pressure and concomitant left atrial dilation,these patients are at high risk for developing atrial ﬁbrillation, pulmonary hypertension,and right-ventricular failure. Multifocal atrial tachycardia is commonly due to diseasesof the lung parenchyma. Right-ventricular outﬂow tract tachycardia is unrelated to val-vular pathology and is common in the young and women. Patients with MS do not de-velop primary left-ventricular dysfunction because the left ventricle is protected fromthe pressure and volume load by the diseased mitral valve. Patients with MS can developright-ventricular hypertrophy and right-ventricular failure. Right bundle branch block isusually unrelated to MS.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 209
V-23. The answer is B.   (Chap. 225)   Although sinoatrial node dysfunction is seen most com-
monly in the elderly with no speciﬁc etiology identiﬁed, certain disease states are associ-
ated with sinoatrial dysfunction, including inﬁltrative diseases such as amyloid andsarcoidosis. Additionally, multiple systemic disorders are associated with sinus bradycar-dia, for instance, hypothyroidism, advanced liver disease, hypoxemia, hypercapnia, acide-mia, and acute hypertension. Finally, several infectious diseases are classically associatedwith sinus bradycardia, notably typhoid fever and brucellosis. Leptospirosis is not associ-ated with sinus bradycardia.
V-24. The answer is E.   (Chap. 229)   Congenital heart disease (CHD) affects about 1% of all
live births, and >85% of affected individuals survive until adulthood. Currently, there aremore adults than children living with CHD in the United States, and many of these indi-viduals are unaware of the presence of CHD until other complications develop. Pulmo-nary hypertension may develop in individuals with a signiﬁcant left-to-right shunt suchas an undiagnosed atrial septal defect. Pulmonary hypertension is the result of increasedblood ﬂow across the pulmonary vascular bed, leading to obliteration of the vascular bed.With the development of signiﬁcant pulmonary hypertension, Eisenmenger syndromemay develop. This occurs when a right-to-left shunt develops as a result of pulmonaryhypertension. Patients will have cyanosis. Erythrocytosis due to chronic hypoxemia is acommon feature of cyanotic congenital heart disease with a hematocrit of up to 65–70%commonly seen. However, symptoms of hyperviscosity rarely develop, and phlebotomy isnot frequently required. The risk of infective endocarditis is increased in those withCHD, and prophylactic antibiotics are recommended for all individuals with CHD un-dergoing invasive procedures. Stroke is greatest in children <4 years of age but is not in-creased in adults unless there is inappropriate use of anticoagulants, concomitant atrialﬁbrillation, or infective endocarditis.
V-25. The answer is A.   (Chap. 221)   Hyperkalemia leads to partial depolarization of cardiac
cells. As a result, there is slowing of the upstroke of the action potential as well as reducedduration of repolarization. The T wave becomes peaked, the RS complex widens and maymerge with the T wave (giving a sine-wave appearance), and the P wave becomes shallowor disappears. Prominent U waves are associated with hypokalemia; ST-segment prolon-gation is associated with hypocalcemia.
V-26. The answer is B.   (Chap. 230)   The time interval between closure of the aortic valve (A
2)
and the opening snap of mitral stenosis is inversely related to the severity of mitral steno-sis. In severe mitral stenosis, the left atrial pressure is high. In a patient with elevated leftatrial pressures, the mitral valve opens quickly after closure of the aortic valve (A
2) due to
the relatively low pressure gradient across the mitral valve in early diastole. If the leftatrial pressure were lower, it would take longer for the pressure gradient across the mitralvalve to cause mitral valve opening. A short interval between A
2 and the opening snap in-
dicates very elevated left atrial pressures. Atrial ﬁbrillation, pulmonary vascular conges-tion, pulmonary hypertension, and right-ventricular failure (elevated jugular pressure,pulsatile liver, peripheral edema) are all potential sequelae of severe mitral stenosis.
V-27. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 219 and 241)   Essential hypertension causes 92 to 94% of
cases of hypertension in the general population, and screening for secondary causes ofhypertension is not cost-effective in most instances. The abrupt onset of severe hyperten-sion or the onset of any hypertension before the age of 35 or after age 55 should promptevaluation for renovascular hypertension. In addition, patients should be evaluated forsecondary causes if previously well-controlled blood pressure suddenly becomes increas-ingly difﬁcult to control as this may indicate the development of renovascular disease.Any symptoms or physical ﬁndings of concern should be investigated further as well. Inthe scenarios presented in Question 27, (B) should signal concern for adult-onset poly-cystic kidney disease and (E) describes a woman with possible Cushing’s disease. Othercauses of secondary hypertension include pheochromocytoma, primary hyperaldoster-onism, medication-induced, and vasculitis.
210 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
V-28. The answer is A.   (Chap. 225)   One-third of patients with sinoatrial node dysfunction
will develop supraventricular tachycardia, usually atrial ﬁbrillation or atrial ﬂutter. Pa-
tients with the tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick sinus syndrome are at risk forthromboembolism. Those at greatest risk include age >65 years, prior history of stroke,valvular heart disease, left ventricular dysfunction, or atrial enlargement. These patientsshould be treated with anticoagulants. There is no reason to discontinue dypyridamole atthis time as she is complaining of no side effects, and the absence of angina argues againstthe need for cardiac catheterization.
V-29. The answer is C.   (Chap. 232)   Cardiac tamponade occurs with accumulation of ﬂuid in
the pericardial space such that the resulting pericardial pressure obstructs venous inﬂowand subsequently cardiac output. The most common causes of cardiac tamponade areneoplasm, renal failure, and idiopathic acute pericarditis. The amount of ﬂuid requiredto cause cardiac tamponade varies widely, depending upon the acuity with which the ef-fusion develops. Rapid accumulation of pericardial ﬂuid will result in tamponade with aslittle as 200 mL of ﬂuid, whereas a slow accumulation of pericardial ﬂuid may result in apericardial effusion of ≥2000 mL. Cardiac tamponade can be rapidly fatal if not recog-nized and treated quickly with pericardiocentesis. Clinical features of pericardial tam-ponade are hypotension, mufﬂed heart sounds, and jugular venous distention, with arapid x descent but without a y descent. These symptoms collectively are known as Beck’s
triad. In more slowly accumulating effusions, symptoms may be those of heart failure,with dyspnea and orthopnea common. An elevated pulsus paradoxus is also present incardiac tamponade. Normally, blood pressure falls during inspiration, due to an increasein blood ﬂow into the right ventricle with displacement of the interventricular septum tothe left, decreasing left-ventricular ﬁlling and cardiac output. This fall in blood pressureresults in a fall in systolic blood pressure of ≤10 mmHg in normal individuals but is exag-
gerated in cardiac tamponade. On electrocardiogram, electrical alternans may be seen.Echocardiogram is frequently diagnostic, showing a large pericardial effusion with col-lapse of the right ventricle during diastole. A right heart catheterization demonstratesequalization of pressures in all chambers of the heart. This is exempliﬁed in option Cwhere the right-atrial pressure, right-ventricular diastolic pressure, pulmonary artery di-astolic pressure, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure are equal. Option A are normalvalues on right heart catheterization. Option B would be seen in congestive heart failure,and option D is seen in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
V-30. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 221 and 231)   The ECG shows slight right axis deviation and
low voltage. These changes are typical of emphysema when the thorax is hyperinﬂatedwith air and the ﬂattened diaphragm pulls the heart inferiorly and vertically. An acutecentral nervous system (CNS) event such as a subarachnoid hemorrhage may cause QTprolongation with deep, wide inverted T waves. Hyperkalemia will cause peaked nar-rowed T waves or a wide QRS complex. Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy willhave left ventricular hypertrophy and widespread deep, broad Q waves.
V-31. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 221 and e21)   This ECG tracing shows the triad of a short PR
interval, wide QRS, and delta waves (seen best in leads I, II, and V
5), consistent with
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. Patients with WPW syndrome are com-monly diagnosed asymptomatically when an ECG is performed showing the classic ﬁnd-ings. Symptoms are due to conduction via an accessory pathway and includetachypalpitations, light headedness, syncope, cardiopulmonary collapse, and sudden car-diac death. Life-threatening presentations are usually due the development of atrial ﬁbril-lation or atrial ﬂutter with 1:1 conduction, which can both precipitate ventricularﬁbrillation.
V-32. The answer is C.   (Chap. e8)   Causes of holosystolic murmurs include mitral regurgita-
tion, tricuspid regurgitation, and ventricular septal defects. Carvallo’s sign describes theincrease in intensity of a tricuspid regurgitation murmur with inspiration. This occursdue to the increase in venous return during inspiration with falling pleural pressure. TheGallavardin effect occurs when the murmur of aortic stenosis is transmitted to the apex
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 211
(and becomes higher pitched), approximating the murmur heard in mitral regurgitation.
The Austin Flint murmur is a late diastolic murmur heard at the apex in aortic regurgita-tion. The murmur of chronic mitral regurgitation does not worsen with inspiration.Atrial septal defects cause a mid-systolic murmur at the mid to upper left sternal border,with ﬁxed splitting of S
2. There is no change with respiration.
V-33. The answer is E.   (Chap. 226)   Persons who have Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome are
predisposed to develop two major types of atrial tachyarrhythmias. The ﬁrst, which re-sembles paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with reentry, involves the atrio-ventricular node in anterograde conduction and the bypass tract in retrogradeconduction. This tachycardia typically has a narrow QRS complex and can be treatedsimilarly to other forms of SVT. The other, more dangerous tachyarrhythmia (present inthe patient described in this question) is atrial ﬁbrillation, which usually is conducted an-terograde down the bypass tract and has a wide QRS conﬁguration. The ventricular ratein this situation is quite rapid, and cardiovascular collapse or ventricular ﬁbrillation mayresult. The usual treatment is direct-current cardioversion, though quinidine may slowconduction through the bypass tract. Verapamil and propranolol have little effect on thebypass tract and may further depress ventricular function, which already is compromisedby the rapid rate. Digoxin may accelerate conduction down the bypass tract and lead toventricular ﬁbrillation.
V-34. The answer is A.   (Chap. 220)   Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) affects 5–8% of Ameri-
cans with increasing incidence with age. Over the age of 65, the incidence of PAD rises tobetween 12 and 20%. The primary symptom of PAD is claudication. As this patient de-scribes, claudication occurs with ambulation and is often described as a crampy to achingpain that is relieved with rest. On physical examination, those with PAD often have di-minished peripheral pulses, delayed capillary reﬁll, and hair loss in the distal extremities.The skin is often cool to touch with a thin, shiny appearance. In severe PAD, pain in theextremities occurs at rest. Diagnosis of PAD can be suggested by these ﬁndings andshould be documented by determination of the ankle-brachial index (ABI), as physicalexamination alone is insufﬁcient to diagnose PAD. Although lack of a palpable pulse sug-gests critical ischemia, it is not diagnostic. T o perform an ABI, blood pressures are deter-mined in the arm and the lower extremities. Either the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibialpulses can be used. The ABI is calculated by dividing the ankle systolic pressure by thebrachial systolic pressure. A resting ABI < 0.9 is abnormal, but critical ischemia with restpain does not occur until the ABI is < 0.3. In individuals with heavily calciﬁed blood ves-sels, the ABI can be abnormally elevated (ABI > 1.2) when PAD is present. In this situa-tion, toe pressures to determine ABI or employing imaging techniques such as MRI orarteriography should be considered. Lower extremity edema is suggestive of congestiveheart failure, not PAD.
V-35.  and.  V-36.  The answers are C and A.   (Chap. 229)   This patient has a coarctation of the
aorta presenting with marked hypertension proximal to the lesion. The narrowing mostcommonly occurs distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, explaining the equalpressure in the arms and reduced pressure in the legs. Coarctations account for approxi-mately 7% of congenital cardiac abnormalities, occur more frequently (2 ×) in men than
in women, and are associated with gonadal dysgenesis and bicuspid aortic valves. Adultswill present with hypertension, manifestations of hypertension in the upper body (head-ache, epistaxis), or leg claudication. Physical examination reveals diminished and/or de-layed lower extremity pulses, enlarged collateral vessels in the upper body, or reduceddevelopment of the lower extremities. Cardiac examination may reveal ﬁndings consis-tent with left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. There may be no murmur, a midsytolic mur-mur over the anterior chest and back, or an aortic murmur with a bicuspid valve.Transthoracic (suprasternal/parasternal) or transesophageal echocardiography, contrastCT or MRI of the thorax, or cardiac catheterization can be diagnostic. MRI of the headwould not be useful diagnostically. The clinical picture is not consistent with renal arterystenosis, pheochromocytoma, carcinoid, or Cushing’s syndrome.
212 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
V-37. The answer is D.   (Chap. 226)   The patient is a young woman with no cardiac disease. In
this population asymptomatic premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) require no spe-
ciﬁc therapy as they are not associated with increased mortality. In patients with symptomssuch as palpitations, the primary therapy should be patient reassurance. If this is unsuccess-ful, beta blockers can be helpful, especially in patients whose symptoms are more prominentduring stressful situations and patients with hyperthyroidism. Even in patients with myocar-dial infarction and PVCs there is no beneﬁt to administering antiarrhythmic therapy withthe goal of decreasing the PVC rate. Trials such as CAST comparing ectopy suppression byencainide, ﬂecainide, moricizine, or placebo showed that mortality was increased in all thedrug groups compared with placebo at 2 years. Thus, it has become clear that PVC reductioncannot be used as a surrogate endpoint for reduction of risk from sudden cardiac death.
V-38. The answer is E.   (Chap. 221)   The limb lead aVR generally has a negative deﬂection as
the primary vector for ventricular depolarization is directed down and away from thislead. Therefore, in the case of left ventricular hypertrophy the negative deﬂection, or Swave, would be expected to be larger without an effect on the R wave. There are multiplecriteria for diagnosing left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG.
V-39. The answer is D.   (Chap. 225)   Pacemaker syndrome occurs as a result of disrupted A V
synchrony. The symptoms are similar to those in this scenario but can also include neckpulsation, confusion, exertional dyspnea, dizziness, and syncope. Signs on examinationmay suggest cardiac congestive failure. The management involves changing the pacingmode to restore A V synchrony. Lyme disease does not increase the risk of coronary arterydiseases. The ECG shows only changes consistent with ventricular pacing, and there is nosuggestion of ischemia. ICU psychosis is a cause of delirium among patients with pro-longed stays in intensive care settings. Pacemaker twiddler’s syndrome occurs when thepulse generator of the pacemaker rotates in its subcutaneous pocket, leading to lead dis-lodgement and failure to sense or pace. In this case, the stable paced rhythm at 60/minmakes this unlikely. Kearne-Sayer syndrome is a rare syndrome caused by abnormal mi-tochondrial DNA in muscle, which can manifest as cardiac conduction delays.
V-40. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 221 and e19)   This ECG shows ﬁndings consistent with an old
anterolateral MI. Given the patient’s history and that the ST-segment elevations in aV
L
and V 2–V4 are unchanged from prior; this ECG is consistent with a left ventricular aneu-FIGURE V-38QRS in hypertrophy
V1Main QRS vector
Normal
RVHor orV1V6V6
LVH
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 213
rysm. A transthoracic echocardiogram should be obtained to assess for severity as well as
the presence of ventricular thrombus. Presence of left ventricular thrombus would war-rant discussion of arrhythmogenic and embolic complications. Chest radiography mayshow an enlarged cardiac silhouette but will not be speciﬁc for the patient’s pathology. Asthe patient’s symptoms may be indicative of a more serious problem (i.e., left ventricularthrombus), it is not appropriate to schedule follow-up months from now. Without symp-toms of chest pain and a stable electrocardiogram, neither cardiac catheterization northrombolysis is indicated.
V-41. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 230 and 242)   Aortic aneurysm results from numerous mech-
anisms. The vast majority are associated with atherosclerosis. The risk factors for athero-sclerosis (hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, etc.) are also risk factors for aneurysmformation. It is unclear if atherosclerosis is the primary cause or a result of the samepathophysiologic mechanisms that lead to dilatation. Other etiologies include congenitalcauses. Marfan’s syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are the most frequently noted.However, there is also an association with osteogenesis imperfecta. Turner’s syndrome isassociated with coarctation of the aorta. Repair of coarctation may predispose to later di-lation and aneurysm formation. Klinefelter’s syndrome, however, is not associated withaneurysm formation. Chronic infectious causes include syphilis and mycotic aneurysmfrom bacterial endocarditis. Chronic inﬂammatory states such as Takayasu’s arteritis, gi-ant cell arteritis, and seronegative spondyloarthropathies such as Reiter’s syndrome andankylosing spondylitis are also associated with aneurysms.
V-42. The answer is D.   (Chap. 238)   Although troponin is a commonly used biomarker for
myocardial necrosis in the setting of acute myocardial infarction, it is also associated withand caused by a number of other clinical entities, including pulmonary embolism, myo-carditis, and congestive heart failure. Troponin elevations are not known to be caused bypneumonia in the absence of myocardial necrosis.
V-43. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 221 and e21)   This ECG tracing shows a normal physiologic
ﬁnding of respiratory sinus arrhythmia. The sinus pacemaker is slow at the beginning ofthe tracing, accelerates during inspiration in the middle of the tracing, and then slowsagain during expiration. In atrial ﬁbrillation there are no discernable conducting P wavesand the rate is irregularly irregular. In complete heart block, the QRS complexes are usu-ally wider than normal and the R-R interval is regular; variability in the R-R interval rulesout complete heart block. There are no nonconducted P waves in this tracing to suggesttype 2 A V block. In a ventriculophasic sinus arrhythmia or idioventricular sinus arrhyth-mia, there is 2:1 A V block with two distinct P-P intervals, which appear to alternate withthe QRS complexes.
V-44. The answer is A.   (Chap. 225)   This patient’s bradycardia may be symptomatic in that he
has altered mental status, but he is also severely hypoxic with an active pulmonary infec-tion. Correction of reversible etiologies is indicated since he is still able to generateenough pulse pressure to perfuse his vital organs. Although myocardial infarction due toright coronary artery disease can cause sinus bradycardia, there is no indication that thispatient has any disease process other than his pulmonary infection. Glucagon can reversethe bradycardic effects of beta blockers. T emporary transvenous pacing is not indicatedsince the patient is well-perfused and reversible etiologies are yet to be corrected.
V-45. The answer is B.   (Chap. 223)   In the diagnostic algorithm for pulmonary hypertension,
the right heart catheterization is important to document the presence and degree of pulmo-nary hypertension. The right-ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) on echocardiographyprovides an estimate of pulmonary arterial pressures, but accurate determination of theRVSP relies upon the presence of triscupid regurgitation and good quality echocardiogra-phy. In this patient, her body habitus is prohibitive in obtaining good windows for echocar-diography. Thus, a right heart catheterization is imperative for documenting pulmonaryhypertension as well as for determining the cause. The right heart catheterization demon-strates an elevated mean arterial pressure, elevated left-ventricular end-diastolic pressure
214 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
(pulmonary capillary wedge pressure), and elevated mean pulmonary artery pressure. In
the presence of a normal cardiac output and an elevated left-ventricular ejection fraction,this is consistent with the diagnosis of diastolic heart failure. Systolic heart failure is associ-ated with similar indices on right heart catheterization, but left-ventricular function is de-pressed in systolic heart failure. The other causes listed as options are known causes ofpulmonary hypertension but would not be expected to cause an increase in the left-ventric-ular end-diastolic pressure. Obstructive sleep apnea is usually associated only with mild ele-vations in pulmonary artery pressure. This patient’s BMI puts her at risk for obstructivesleep apnea but would not be responsible for these right heart catheterization values. Bothchronic thromboembolic disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension can cause severe ele-vations in the pulmonary arterial pressure but have a normal left atrial pressure.
V-46. The answer is C.   (Chap. 229; Brickner et al, 2000.)   Left-to-right shunts occur in all
types of atrial and ventricular septal defects but generally do not result in cyanosis,whereas large right-to-left shunts frequently do. The magnitude of the shunt depends onthe size of the defect, the diastolic properties of both ventricles, and the relative imped-ance of the pulmonary and systemic circulations. Defects of the sinus venosus type occurhigh in the atrial septum near the entry of the superior vena cava or lower near the ori-ﬁce of the inferior vena cava and may be associated with anomalous connection of theright inferior pulmonary vein to the right atrium. In the case of anomalous origin of theleft coronary artery from the pulmonary artery, as pulmonary vascular resistance de-clines immediately after birth, perfusion of the left coronary artery from the pulmonarytrunk ceases and the direction of ﬂow in the anomalous vessel reverses. Twenty percentof patients with this defect can survive to adulthood because of myocardial blood supplyﬂowing totally through the right coronary artery. In the absence of pulmonary hyperten-sion blood will ﬂow from the aorta to the pulmonary artery throughout the cardiac cy-cle, resulting in a “continuous” murmur at the left sternal border. In total anomalouspulmonary venous connection all the venous blood returns to the right atrium; there-fore, an interatrial communication is required and right-to-left shunts with cyanosis arecommon.
V-47. The answer is C.   (Chap. 230)   This patient’s murmur is consistent with chronic aortic
regurgitation. The high-pitched blowing murmur in the left third intercostal space iscommonly present, whereas the second diastolic murmur at the apex, resembling mi-tral stenosis (Austin Flint murmur), is not always present. Peripheral signs of chronicaortic regurgitation are manifestations of a widened pulse pressure and equalization ofaortic and ventricular end-diastolic pressures. As pressure increases in the left ventricle,hypertrophy develops as a compensatory mechanism. Left atrial, but not right atrial,enlargement may be apparent on the ECG if there is concomitant mitral regurgitation.Inferior Q waves may be seen if there has been a myocardial infarction. ST-segment de-pressions may be seen in the lateral leads when there is signiﬁcant left-ventricular hy-pertrophy. Low voltage on the ECG can be seen in obstructive lung diseases, pericardialeffusions, and inﬁltrative diseases of the myocardium. Diffuse ST-segment elevationand PR-segment depression are seen in pericarditis.
V-48. The answer is B.   (Chap. 226)   The differentiation of ventricular tachycardia from su-
praventricular tachycardia with an aberration of intraventricuar conduction can be chal-lenging and has important implications for management. By deﬁnition, however,ventricular tachycardia is associated with atrioventricular (A V) dissociation. Cannon a
waves are found in the jugular venous pulsations when the atria are contracting against aclosed tricuspid valve. This can occur only with A V dissociation, thus proving ventriculartachycardia. Hypotension, irregular rhythm, and syncope can all be seen in both ventric-ular tachycardia and supraventricuar tachycardia with aberrancy.
V-49. The answer is C.   (Chap. 237)   The ischemic ST-segment response during exercise is
characterized by ﬂat or downsloping ST-segment depression of at least 1 mm lasting for>0.08 s. Upsloping ST segments, ventricular arrhythmias, T-wave abnormalities, and con-duction disturbances that develop during exercise should be noted, but are not diagnostic.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 215
A decrease in blood pressure or a failure to increase blood pressure with signs of ischemia
on the stress test may be indicative of global dyskinesis and severe ischemic heart disease.The normal response to the graded exercise protocol is a gradual increase in blood pres-sure. Isolated hypertension during a stress test, despite its severity, is not indicative of my-ocardial ischemia. Developing angina at a low work-load (i.e., before completion of stageII of a Bruce protocol) or persistent ST-segment depressions lasting >5 min into recoveryincrease the speciﬁcity of the test and indicate a high risk of future events. The target heartrate for exercise stress tests is ≥85% of maximal predicted heart rate for age and sex.
V-50. The answer is A.   (Chap. 220)   The patient presents with signs and symptoms consistent
with congestive heart failure. Her history of tuberculosis puts her at risk for constrictivepericarditis, and indeed, chest CT shows the classic pericardial calciﬁcations of this disor-der. As she is relatively young and does not have enlarged chambers or ischemic changeson the electrocardiogram, dilated or ischemic cardiomyopathy is unlikely. Constrictivepericarditis has certain suggestive physical ﬁndings, notably the prominent and rapid ydescent in the jugular venous pulsations that represents early and rapid ﬁlling of the rightventricle during early diastole. Other ﬁndings that have been associated include rapid x
descent, pericardial knock that is similar to a third heart sound, and impressive ascites,edema, and occasionally Kussmaul’s sign (lack of inspiratory decline in jugular venouspressure). A double systolic apical impulse has been described in patients with hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy. A loud and ﬁxed split P
2 suggests pulmonary hypertension.
Cannon a waves are most commonly seen in arrhythmias that cause atrioventricular dis-
sociation. Finally, opening snaps are brief, high-pitched diastolic sounds that usually aredue to mitral stenosis.
V-51. The answer is A.   (Chap. 230)   Aortic stenosis in adults may be due to congenital degen-
erative calciﬁcation of the aortic cusps. Age-related degenerative caliﬁcation is the mostcommon cause of aortic stenosis (so-called senile aortic stenosis). Approximately 30% ofpersons over age 65 have evidence of aortic valve sclerosis. Many have a murmur withoutobstruction, while 2% exhibit stenosis. The risk factors for developing aortic stenosis(dyslipidemia, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, etc.) are similar to those for developingatherosclerotic coronary artery disease. Pathology of the affected valves will show evi-dence of vascular inﬂammation, lipid deposition, and calciﬁcation. However, treatingrisk factors such as dyslipidemia has not been shown to improve severe aortic stenosis.There is no effective medical therapy for aortic stenosis. In younger patients presentingwith aortic stenosis, the aortic valve apparatus is commonly bicuspid.
V-52. The answer is B.   (Chap. 226)   Atrial ﬁbrillation is characterized by disorganized atrial
activity with an irregular ventricular response to atrial activity. This lack of organizationresults in stasis of blood in the atria and puts the patient at risk for cardioembolic stroke.Several factors associated with increased stroke risk have been identiﬁed, including dia-betes mellitus, hypertension, age over 65, rheumatic heart disease, a prior stroke or tran-sient ischemic attack, congestive heart failure, and a transesophageal echocardiogramshowing spontaneous echo contrast in the left atrium, left atrial atheroma, or left atrialappendage velocity <20 cm/s. Hypercholesterolemia is not associated with an increasedrisk of stroke in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation.
V-53. The answer is C.   (Chap. 8)   Cardiac complications are the most important cause of peri-
operative morbidity and mortality, and primary care physicians are frequently asked to as-sess a patient’s perioperative risk for cardiac events before cardiac procedures. Multipleclinical risk scores have been developed by various professional organizations, such as theAmerican College of Physicians and the American Heart Association. Patients deemed tobe at low risk may proceed to surgery without further intervention. The patient describedabove has only one major risk—intraperitoneal surgery—on the six-point revised cardiacrisk index (see Table V-53). This puts the patient into an intermediate-risk classication bythis scale; however, further testing is indicated only if the patient is undergoing vascularsurgery. In addition, the patient has excellent functional status and can achieve greaterthan four metabolic equivalents with ease. Examples of activities that consume four meta-
216 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
bolic equivalents are climbing one ﬂight of stairs and walking two blocks on level ground.
The risk of postoperative cardiovascular complications does not appear to be inﬂuencedby stable hypertension, elevated cholesterol, obesity, cigarette smoking, or bundle branchblock. Perioperative beta blockade has been shown to decrease rates of postoperative myo-cardial infarction and cardiac death by at least 50% and is recommended for any patientwho has cardiac risk factors or is at intermediate risk of cardiovascular complications aftersurgery. The patient’s prior adverse reaction to beta blockade should not preclude its usein the perioperative period, as it consisted of only mild fatigue and decreased sexual func-tioning. Finally, the patient’s pulmonary risk is likely to be low as he quit smoking morethan 8 weeks before surgery and has good functional status without dyspnea.
V-54. The answer is A.   (Chap. e8)   This patient most likely experienced papillary muscle rup-
ture, which led to acute mitral regurgitation. Other settings where acute mitral regurgita-tion may occur include rupture of chordae tendineae in the setting of myxomatous mitralvalve disease, infective endocarditis, or chest wall trauma. The regurgitation into a normal-sized noncompliant left atrium results in an early systolic descrescendo murmur heard bestnear the apical impulse. The decrescendo nature contrasts with chronic mitral regurgita-tion due to the rapid pressure rise in the left atrium during systole. Chronic mitral regurgi-tation causes a holosystolic murmur. Ventricular septal rupture also causes a holosystolicmurmur and is associated with a systolic thrill at the left sternal border. Severe aortic steno-sis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy both present with a mid-systolic murmur.
V-55. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 239 and 264)   This patient has a right ventricular infarction.
The combination of ﬁndings consistent with bradycardia, cardiogenic shock, low normalleft ventricular and PA pressures, and markedly elevated right atrial pressure is consistentwith acute right ventricular (RV) failure. An acute pulmonary embolus may also causeacute RV failure, but the PA pressure is usually elevated. RV infarction is usually due toocclusion of the right coronary artery; the bradycardia is due to sinus or A V node is-chemia. Right-sided precordial ECG will show ST-segment elevation. Occlusion of theleft main artery will cause cardiogenic shock, but the PCW pressure will be elevated. Per-forated duodenal ulcer and ruptured aortic aneurysm will cause hypovolemic shock withlow RA and PCW pressures. Gram-negative sepsis will generally have a normal or in-creased cardiac index with normal ﬁlling pressures and low blood pressure.
V-56. The answer is D.   (Chap. 230)   Indications for surgical repair of mitral regurgitation are
dependent on left-ventricular function, ventricular size, and the presence of sequelae ofchronic mitral regurgitation. The experience of the surgeon and the likelihood of success-ful mitral valve repair are also an important consideration. The management strategy forchronic severe mitral regurgitation depends on the presence of symptoms, left-ventricu-lar function, left-ventricular dimensions, and the presence of complicating factors suchT ABLE V-53 The Revised Cardiac Risk Index
FactorAdjusted Odds Ratio (OR) for Cardiac 
Complications in Derivation Cohort
1. High-risk surgery 2.8
2. Ischemic heart disease 2.4
3. History of congestive heart failure 1.9
4. History of cerebrovascular disease 3.2
5. Insulin therapy for diabetes mellitus 3.0
6. Preoperative serum creatinine >2.0 mg/dL 3.0
Cardiac Complication Rates, %
Class Number of Factors Derivation Cohort Validation Cohort 
  I 0 0.5   0.4
 II 1 1.3   0.9
III 2 3.6   6.6
IV 3–6 9.1 11.0
Source:  Adapted from TH Lee et al. Circulation 100:1043, 1999; with permission.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 217
as pulmonary hypertension and atrial ﬁbrillation. With very depressed left-ventricular
function (<30% or end-systolic dimension > 55 mm), the risk of surgery increases, left-ventricular recovery is often incomplete, and long-term survival is reduced. However,since medical therapy offers little for these patients, surgical repair should be consideredif there is a high likelihood of success (>90%). When ejection fraction is between 30 and60% and end-systolic dimension rises above 40 mm, surgical repair is indicated even inthe absence of symptoms, owing to the excellent long-term results achieved in this group.Waiting for worsening left-ventricular function leads to irreversible left-ventricular re-modeling. Pulmonary hypertension and atrial ﬁbrillation are important to consider asmarkers for worsening regurgitation. For asymptomatic patients with normal left-ventricular function and dimensions, the presence of new pulmonary hypertension oratrial ﬁbrillation in patients with normal ejection fraction and end-systolic dimensionsare class IIa indications for mitral valve repair.
V-57. The answer is A.   (Chap. 236)   The metabolic syndrome (according to the NCET:ATP III
guidelines) is deﬁned by three or more of the following: central obesity (men >102 cm;women >88 cm), hypertriglyceridemia ( ≥150 mg/dL or on speciﬁc medication), low HDL
cholesterol (men <40 mg/dL; women <50 mg/dL), hypertension (systolic ≥130 mmHg or
diastolic ≥85 mmHg, or on speciﬁc medication), and hyperglycemia (fasting plasma glu-
cose ≥100 mg/dL, or previous diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, or on speciﬁc medication).
The International Diabetes Foundation also has criteria that further subdivide the cut-offsof waist circumference based on ethnicity. Patients with the metabolic syndrome are atgreater risk than patients without the syndrome for developing conditions such as athero-sclerotic cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease, sleepapnea, and polycystic ovary syndrome. The presence of one of the criteria should promptthe clinician to search for other criteria and treat the conditions as necessary.
V-58. The answer is C.   (Chap. 231)   Peripartum cardiomyopathy can develop in the last tri-
mester of pregnancy or within 6 months of delivery. The cause is unknown and mortality ishigh (25–50%). Risk factors for developing the disease are African ancestry, age >30 years,and multiparity. Counseling patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy who are consider-ing becoming pregnant in the future is important as it directly impacts maternal and fetalmortality. Some of these patients may become pregnant again; however, women whoseventricular function has not returned to normal usually are advised against pregnancysince the mortality can be as high as 50% during subsequent pregnancies in this popula-tion. Among all-comers, there is a 25–67% chance of having another bout of peripartumcardiomyopathy during future pregnancies. Sex of the child during the incident episode ofperipartum cardiomyopathy, maternal age, or nadir ejection fraction is not known to beassociated with future events. African ancestry is a risk for developing peripartum cardio-myopathy but subsequent risk of mortality depends on the resolution of the ﬁrst episode.
V-59. The answer is B.   (Chap. 231)   Varying degrees of cardiac enlargement and ﬁndings of
congestion can be found in patients with dilated cardiomyopathies, depending on thechronicity of the illness. In severe left ventricular dilatation, the jugular venous pressure iselevated, murmurs of mitral and tricuspid regurgitation are common, and third or fourthheart sounds may be heard. Owing to the depressed cardiac output, systemic vascular re-sistance increases, and with it, diastolic blood pressure. Systolic blood pressure may de-crease as a result of decreased cardiac output leading to a narrow pulse pressure.Conditions in which S
2 becomes absent include severe aortic stenosis and severe aortic in-
sufﬁciency when the insufﬁciency murmur is louder than S 2. Paradoxical splitting occurs
when P 2 and A 2 become closer during inspiration and can be seen in patients with left
bundle branch block. Pulsus bisferiens (double-impulse pulse) is classically detected whenaortic insufﬁciency exists in association with aortic stenosis, but it may also be found inisolated but severe aortic insufﬁciency and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
V-60. The answer is D.   (Chap. 235)   HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (“statins”) clearly re-
duce cardiovascular events in patients with atherosclerosis. The mechanism appears to bemore complex than simply the reduction of serum LDL. Lipid-lowering drugs do not ap-
218 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
pear to cause signiﬁcant regression of ﬁxed coronary lesions. The beneﬁt of statins ap-
pears to be related to stabilization of plaques, long-term egress of lipids, and/or improvedvasodilatory tone. The improved vasodilatory tone appears to be mediated by modula-tion of endothelial-dependent vasodilators such as nitric oxide. Thus, the beneﬁcial effectof the statins probably consists of an early effect on vasomotion (or other mechanisms)and a long-term effect on serum and plaque lipids.
V-61. The answer is A.   (Chap. 237)   Dipyridamole inhibits the activity of adenosine deaminase
and phosphodiesterase, which cause an accumulation of adenosine and coronary arteryvasodilation. Where there is signiﬁcant obstructive coronary disease, there is a pressure gra-dient between prestenotic and poststenotic segments, and the poststenotic vascular bed di-lates to allow for preserved coronary blood ﬂow. Higher degrees of obstruction causemaximal poststenotic vasodilation. In nonaffected regions of myocardium, there is no dis-tal vasodilation. Dipyridamole, by disproportionately dilating nonobstructed areas of myo-cardium, is useful as a pharmacologic agent to differentiate ischemic from nonischemictissue. Where there is high-grade, three-vessel disease, the usefulness of dipyridamole oradenosine infusion is limited by (1) baseline maximal vasodilation, and (2) lack of ability todifferentiate affected from nonaffected regions of myocardium. Dipyridamole testing ishelpful in identifying ischemic tissue in a single-vessel territory. Intraventricular conduc-tion abnormalities limit the use of electrocardiography or echocardiography as a stress-imaging technique. Dipyridamole, as a pharmacologic stressor, is not affected by heart rateand may be particularly useful for patients who are unable to exercise.
V-62. The answer is C.   (Chap. 239)   Myoglobin is released from ischemic myocardial cells
and appears in serum within hours. It has a very short half-life in serum as it is excretedrapidly in the urine. Serum myoglobin returns to normal within 24 h after an infarction.Therefore, in this patient a new elevation of myoglobin would be helpful in distinguish-ing new myocardial necrosis. Troponin-I and troponin-T are more speciﬁc markers ofmyocardial necrosis but have a long half-life in the circulation. They may remain elevatedfor over a week after an acute MI. Therefore, they are not as useful for detecting new orrecurrent injury. In the presence of a preexisting left bundle branch ECG is of limitedutility in detecting new ischemia. Serial echocardiograms may detect new wall motionabnormalities that suggest new ischemia or infarction, but in the absence of a prior studya single echocardiogram would have limited utility in this patient.
V-63. The answer is B.   (Chap. 242)   Aortitis is an uncommon cause of an ascending aortic
aneurysm and commonly presents with fevers and chest pain. Malaise and weight lossmay also occur in association with underlying rheumatic disease. Physical examinationfrequently reveals evidence of aortic regurgitation. All of the listed choices can cause aor-titis. However, giant cell arteritis almost never occurs in individuals <50 years of age ( SM
Levine ,DB Hellmann :Curr Opin Rheumatol 14 :3,2002).
V-64. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 221 and e19)   This ECG shows ST-segment elevation in all
leads except for aV
L, aV R and V 1. There is PR depression in the inferior leads and PR ele-
vation in aV R, consistent with acute pericarditis. Acute pericarditis can be due to infec-
tious, neoplastic, autoimmune, cardiac, metabolic, or pharmacologic events. Most often,a causal factor is not identiﬁed. The ECG in acute pericarditis evolves through four stages.In stage 1 (hours to days), there are diffuse ST-segment elevations and PR-segment de-pressions. Stage 2 is characterized by normalization of the ST and PR segments. In stage 3,there are diffuse T-wave inversions. In stage 4, the tracing may become normal or the T-wave inversions may persist. Proximal main coronary artery occlusion can manifest as dif-fuse ST-segment elevations; however, PR-segment depression is highly speciﬁc for acutepericarditis. The echocardiogram will show a small to moderate amount of pericardial ef-fusion with normal left ventricular function. Focal ST-segment elevations consistent withacute myocardial infarction would correlate with focal hypokinesis on echocardiography.This ECG does not meet any criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy. There are no pace-maker lead depolarizations or right bundle branch block, which might suggest a catheterirritating the right ventricular myocardium.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 219
V-65. The answer is E.   (Chap. 221)   The ECG shows a junctional rhythm with an atrioventric-
ular (A V) block and ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. There are also reciprocal
changes in I and aVL. These changes are consistent with an acute inferior wall myocardialinfarction. The ECG is more useful in localizing regions of ischemia in ST elevation than innon-ST elevation MI. Anteroseptal ischemia causes changes in V
1–V3 and apical/lateral is-
chemia in V 4–V6. The right coronary artery (RCA) generally supplies blood ﬂow to the
right ventricle and the AV node. The inferior-posterior region of the left ventricle is sup-plied by the right coronary artery or the left circumﬂex coronary artery. In approximately60 to 70% of people it is supplied by the RCA (right dominant). In this case the presence ofA V nodal dysfunction and inferior ischemia makes disease of the RCA most likely.
V-66. The answer is B.   (Chap. 238)   Patients with unstable angina/non-ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI) exhibit a wide spectrum of risk of death, MI, or ur-gent revascularization. Risk stratiﬁcation tools such as the TIMI risk score are useful foridentifying patients who beneﬁt from an early invasive strategy and those who are bestsuited for a more conservative approach. The TIMI risk score is composed of seven inde-pendent risk factors: Age ≥65, three or more cardiovascular risk factors, prior stenosis
>50%, ST-segment deviation ≥0.5mm, two or more anginal events in <24 h, aspirin usage
in the past 7 days, and elevated cardiac markers. Aspirin resistance can occur in 5–10% ofpatients and is more common among those taking lower doses of aspirin. Having unstableangina despite aspirin usage suggests aspirin resistance. Use of a beta-agonist and a diureticdo not confer an independent risk for death, MI, or need for urgent revascularization.
V-67. The answer is E.   (Chap. 231)   A common diagnostic dilemma is differentiating con-
strictive pericarditis from a restrictive cardiomyopathy. Elevated jugular venous pressureis almost universally present in both. Kussmaul’s sign (increase in or no change in jugularvenous pressure with inspiration) can be seen in both conditions. Other signs of heartfailure do not reliably distinguish the two conditions. In restrictive cardiomyopathy, theapical impulse is usually easier to palpate than in constrictive pericarditis and mitral re-gurgitation is more common. These clinical signs, however, are not reliable to differenti-ate the two entities. In conjunction with clinical information and additional imagingstudies of the left ventricle and pericardium, certain pathognomic ﬁndings increase diag-nostic certainty. A thickened or calciﬁed pericardium increases the likelihood of constric-tive pericarditis. Conduction abnormalities are more common in inﬁltrating diseases ofthe myocardium. In constrictive pericarditis, measurements of diastolic pressures willshow equilibrium between the ventricles, while unequal pressures and/or isolated ele-vated left ventricular pressures are more consistent with restrictive cardiomyopathy. Theclassic “square root sign” during right heart catheterization (deep, sharp drop in rightventricular pressure in early diastole, followed by a plateau during which there is no fur-ther increase in right ventricular pressure) can be seen in both restrictive cardiomyopathyand constrictive pericarditis. The presence of a paraprotein abnormality (MGUS, my-eloma, amyloid) makes restrictive cardiomyopathy more common.
V-68. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 221 and e19)   This ECG demonstrates marked ST-segment ele-
vations in the inferior leads (II, III, aV
F) and laterally (V 6) as well as prominent ST-segment
depressions with upright T waves in V 1–V4 consistent with an acute posterior and anterola-
teral myocardial infarction (MI). The 12-lead ECG is most useful for detecting infarctions inthe inferior, lateral, and anterior walls of the left ventricle. As 40% of patients with inferiorwall infarctions have right ventricular or posterior wall involvement, additional testing isrecommended in the acute care of patients with inferior MIs. The addition of right ventric-ular leads (V
4R, V 5R, V 6R) and posterior leads (V 7, V8, V9) improves both sensitivity and
speciﬁcity for detecting infarctions in these territories. Although posterior infarctions pre-dispose a patient to high-grade A V block, a speciﬁc rhythm strip analysis is not indicated.These patients should be monitored on telemetry. Chest radiography and CT scanning arenot routinely obtained when a patient has an acute MI. Unnecessary testing will delay thetime to reperfusion therapy, which has a direct impact on mortality and morbidity. Peri-carditis may cause diffuse ST-segment elevation but not focal changes as described above.
220 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
V-69. The answer is F .   (Chap. 230)   Tricuspid regurgitation is most commonly caused by di-
lation of the tricuspid annulus due to right-ventricular enlargement of any cause. Any
cause of left-ventricular failure that results in right-ventricular failure may lead to tricus-pid regurgitation. Congenital heart diseases or pulmonary arterial hypertension leadingto right-ventricular failure will dilate the tricuspid annulus. Inferior wall infarction mayinvolve the right ventricle. Rheumatic heart disease may involve the tricuspid valve, al-though less commonly than the mitral valve. Infective endocarditis, particularly in IVdrug users, will infect the tricuspid valve, causing vegetations and regurgitation. Othercauses of tricuspid regurgitation include carcinoid heart disease, endomyocardial ﬁbro-sis, congenital defects of the atrioventricular canal, and right-ventricular pacemakers.
V-70. The answer is A.   (Chap. 229)   Given the young age of this patient, bicuspid aortic valve
is the most likely cause of aortic stenosis. Bicuspid aortic valve is one of the most commonabnormalities of the circulatory system, affecting 1–2% of the population. For unknownreasons, males are twice as likely as females to have a bicuspid aortic valve. Bicuspid aorticvalves often are undetected until symptomatic aortic stenosis develops. This most com-monly occurs between the fourth and ﬁfth decades of life. Congenital aortic stenosis wouldbe expected to present earlier in life. A murmur is often present from birth and requiresvalvular replacement before adulthood. Calciﬁc aortic stenosis is the most common causeof aortic stenosis and most commonly presents in the seventh or eighth decade. Rheumaticheart disease as a result of rheumatic fever is also commonly associated with aortic valvedisease. The age of presentation of rheumatic heart disease falls between that of bicuspidaortic valve and calciﬁc aortic stenosis, usually around the sixth or seventh decade.
V-71. The answer is E.   (Chap. 228)   Cardiac transplantation was ﬁrst performed in 1967 and
since the 1990s, about 4000 cardiac transplants are performed yearly worldwide. Approx-imately 2200 of these are performed in the United States. Severe heart failure with refrac-tory symptoms is the main indication for cardiac transplantation and may be caused by avariety of underlying diseases. In general, cardiac transplantation is reserved for youngerindividuals without signiﬁcant comorbidities. The patients given highest priority fortransplant are those requiring vasopressor support with concomitant use of a pulmonaryartery catheter or those requiring mechanical circulatory support. Individuals requiringvasopressor support managed without pulmonary artery catheter are given second high-est priority. All other transplants are determined by a variety of factors including time onwaiting list, immune sensitization, and ABO blood type. Following transplantation, indi-viduals largely have good outcomes. One-year survival is 83%, and 76% survive >3 years.The average “half-life” of a cardiac transplant is 9.3 years. More than 90% of individualsreturn to good functional status. Acute rejection and infection are the commonest causesof early transplant failure and death. Most programs perform routine endomyocardial bi-opsies to detect rejection for a period of 5 years after transplant. Mortality that occurs >1year after transplant is most likely related to coronary artery disease, which is acceleratedposttransplant due to immunosuppression.
V-72. The answer is D.   (Chap. 236)   According to the NCEP:ATP III guidelines, treating the
dyslipidemia of the metabolic syndrome should ﬁrst be directed towards LDL cholesterolgoals (usually <100 mg/dL, depending on the presence of risk factors). If triglyceride lev-els are ≥200 mg/dL after the LDL goal is reached, the clinician should set a secondary goalfor non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 30 points higher than the LDL goal. Whentriglyceride levels are between 200 and 499 mg/dL, options include nicotinic acid, a ﬁ-brate, or intensifying therapy with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (statin). Average ef-ﬁcacy of these drug classes are as follows: nicotinic acid, 20–40%; ﬁbrate, 35–50%; statin,7–30%). Cholestyramine and colestipole are bile acid sequestrants. They lower choles-terol but often increase triglyceride levels and should not be used in patients with triglyc-erides >200 mg/dL. The effects of ezetimibe on hypertriglyceridemia are not wellestablished. Nicotinic acid is effective for treating hypertriglyceridemia but may worsenglucose control and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with the metabolicsyndrome. Gemﬁbrozil is more likely to worsen statin myopathy than fenoﬁbrate.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 221
V-73. The answer is D.   (Chap. 237)   The use of PCI with stenting relieves angina better than
best medical therapy, but the salutary effects on coronary death or MI are not well estab-
lished. In a recent large clinical trial (COURAGE trial) of patients with stable coronary ar-tery disease, death rates with medical therapy were equivalent to death rates with PCI at 4years of follow-up. Balloon angioplasty reocclusion rates are up to two times higher com-pared to restenosis with stenting. This type of restenosis is mediated by hyperproliferationof smooth muscle cells into the intima as they react to the vascular injury induced by theballoon angioplasty. However, due to the delayed endothelial healing that is achieved withdrug-eluting stents, the patient is exposed to a higher risk of subacute in-stent restenosis.This type of restenosis is mediated by thrombus formation as the denuded endothelium isexposed to the circulation. Patients with left-main coronary occlusion, three-vessel dis-ease, two-vessel disease including the left main, impaired left ventricular function, or di-abetes should be considered for CABG.
V-74. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 221 and e21)   This ECG shows an example of the hereditary
long-QT syndrome. There is a wide range of abnormal rate-corrected QT interval values,ranging from 400–640 ms. A QT
c≥600 ms is associated with greater risk for cardiac events,
but only a minority of patients have this degree of QT prolongation. T-wave notching, or“humps,” may be common in asymptomatic patients and are of prognostic importance.Avoiding life-threatening drug interactions is important when managing a patient with he-reditary long-QT syndrome. Of the choices above, only methadone is known to prolongthe QT interval, and it should be avoided in patients with hereditary long-QT syndrome.
V-75. The answer is B.   (Chap. 238)   Unstable angina is deﬁned as angina or ischemic discom-
fort with at least one of three factors: pain at rest lasting >10 min, severe recent pain(within 4–6 weeks), or crescendo angina. NSTEMI is diagnosed when a patient with un-stable angina has positive cardiac biomarkers. Anti-ischemic therapy (nitrates, betablockers) is important for symptom relief and to prevent recurrence of chest pain. Anti-thrombotic therapy is directed against the platelet aggregation at the site of the rupturedplaque. Initially, this therapy should consist of aspirin. Addition of clopidogrel confers anadditional 20% risk reduction in both low- and high-risk NSTEMI patients, as demon-strated in the CURE trial. Continuation of treatment for up to 12 months confers addi-tional beneﬁt in patients treated conservatively and among those who underwentpercutaneous coronary intervention. The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors are usually re-served for high-risk (i.e., troponin-positive) patients and may not be beneﬁcial for pa-tients treated conservatively. Statin therapy is important for secondary prevention;however, spironolactone is not a ﬁrst-line therapy for NSTEMI.
V-76. The answer is A.   (Chap. 230)   Bioprosthetic valves are made from human, porcine, or
bovine tissue. The major advantage of a bioprosthetic valve is the low incidence ofthromboembolic phenomena, particularly 3 months after implantation. Although in theimmediate postoperative period some anticoagulation may occur, after 3 months there isno further need for anticoagulation or monitoring. The downside is the natural historyand longevity of the bioprosthetic valve. Bioprosthetic valves tend to degenerate mechan-ically. Approximately 50% will need replacement at 15 years. Therefore, these valves areuseful in patients with contraindications to anticoagulation, such as elderly patients withcomorbidities and younger patients who desire to become pregnant. Elderly people mayalso be spared the need for repeat surgery as their life span may be shorter than the natu-ral history of the bioprosthesis. Mechanical valves offer superior durability. Hemody-namic parameters are improved with double-disk valves compared with single-disk orball-and-chain valves. However, thrombogenicity is high and chronic anticoagulation ismandatory. Y ounger patients with no contraindications to anticoagulation may be betterserved by mechanical valve replacement.
V-77. The answer is A.   (Chap. 229)   This patient is presenting with Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
This designation is applied to patients with communications between the right and leftcirculations, pulmonary hypertension, and a predominantly right-to-left shunt. Eisen-menger’s syndrome can develop in patients with communication at the atrial, ventricu-
222 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
lar, or aortopulmonary level. These shunts are initially left to right and therefore do not
present with cyanosis. Pulmonary hypertension develops over years as a result of in-creased pulmonary ﬂow, increased vascular tone, and erythrocytosis. Cyanosis developswhen the pulmonary hypertension becomes so severe that it reverses the shunt. Atrialseptal defects are most common in adults presenting with Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Thispatient had no evidence of pulmonary hypertension or cyanosis 10 years ago. Ebstein’sanomaly, tetralogy of Fallot, and truncus arteriosis all cause cyanosis.
V-78. The answer is C.   (Chap. 223)   The pulmonary capillary wedge tracing shows a large v
wave at rest that substantially increases during exercise. This is a ﬁnding seen with mitralregurgitation. In this patient, the mitral regurgitation worsened during exercise and wasdue to occult coronary artery disease. The patient’s dyspnea improved with following an-gioplasty and stenting of the left circumﬂex artery. The pulmonary capillary wedge pres-sure reﬂects the left-ventricular end-diastolic pressure in the absence of mitral stenosis orpulmonary venous hypertension. In mitral stenosis, there is a signiﬁcant drop betweenleft-atrial and left-ventricular diastolic pressures and elevation of the pulmonary capil-lary wedge pressure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension would have a normal pulmonarycapillary wedge pressure but an elevated pulmonary artery mean pressure, which is notshown in these tracings. In aortic stenosis, the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure maybe elevated if heart failure is present, but no abnormal wave forms would be expected.Congestive heart failure causes an elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, which isnot present here. The large v waves of mitral regurgitation should not be read as the pul-monary capillary wedge pressure.
V-79.  and.  V-80.  The answers are D and E.   (Chap. 241)   This patient presents at a young age
with hypertension that is difﬁcult to control, raising the question of secondary causes ofhypertension. The most likely diagnosis in this patient is primary hyperaldosteronism,also known as Conn’s syndrome. The patient has no physical features that suggest con-genital adrenal hyperplasia or Cushing’s syndrome. In addition, there is no glucose intol-erance as is commonly seen in Cushing’s syndrome. The lack of episodic symptoms andthe labile hypertension make pheochromocytoma unlikely. The ﬁndings of hypokalemiaand metabolic alkalosis in the presence of difﬁcult to control hypertension yield the likelydiagnosis of Conn’s syndrome. Diagnosis of the disease can be difﬁcult, but the preferredtest is the plasma aldosterone/renin ratio. This test should be performed at 8 
A.M., and a
ratio above 30 to 50 is diagnostic of primary hyperaldosteronism. Caution should bemade in interpreting this test while the patient is on ACE inhibitor therapy as ACE inhib-itors can falsely elevate plasma renin activity. However, a plasma renin level that is unde-tectable or an elevated aldosterone/renin ratio in the presence of an ACE inhibitortherapy is highly suggestive of primary hyperaldosteronism. Selective adrenal vein reninsampling may be performed after the diagnosis to help determine if the process is unilat-eral or bilateral. Although ﬁbromuscular dysplasia is a common secondary cause of hy-pertension in young females, the presence of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis shouldsuggest Conn’s syndrome. Thus, magnetic resonance imaging of the renal arteries is un-necessary in this case. Measurement of 24-h urine collection for potassium wasting andaldosterone secretion can be useful in the diagnosis of Conn’s syndrome. The measure-ment of metanephrines or cortisol is not indicated.
V-81. The answer is D.   (Chap. 231)   Cardiac involvement is common in many of the neuro-
muscular diseases. The ECG pattern of Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy is unique andconsists of tall R waves in the right precordial leads with an R/S ratio >1.0, often withdeep Q waves in the limb and precordial leads. These patients often have a variety of su-praventricular and ventricular arrhythmias and are at risk for sudden death due to the in-trinsic cardiomyopathy as well as the low ejection fraction. Implantable cardioverterdeﬁbrillators should be considered in the appropriate patient. Global left ventricular dys-function is a common ﬁnding in dilated cardiomyopathies, whereas focal wall motionabnormalities and angina are more common if there is ischemic myocardium. This pa-tient is at risk for venous thromboembolism; however, chronic thromboembolism would
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 223
not account for the severity of the left heart failure and would present with ﬁndings con-
sistent with pulmonary hypertension. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a disease of motorneurons and does not involve the heart. This patient would be young for that diagnosis.An advanced atrial septal defect would present with cyanosis and heart failure (Eisen-menger’s physiology).
V-82. The answer is A.   (Chap. 220)   Splitting of the second heart sound normally occurs dur-
ing inspiration when there is increased venous return to the right ventricle that increases itsstroke volume and delays closure of the pulmonic valve. During inspiration, it is normal tohear the closing of the aortic valve (A
2) before the closing of the pulmonic valve (P 2). A
ﬁxed split of the second heart sound occurs in the setting of an atrial septal defect. Withthis congenital heart defect, the volume of blood that is shunted from the left atrium to theright atrium results in a stable right-ventricular stroke volume. Thus, there is no differencebetween inspiration and expiration, resulting in a ﬁxed split of the second heart sound.
V-83. The answer is D.   (Chap. 230)   As described by LaPlace’s law ( S=Pr/h; where S = wall
stress, P = pressure, r = radius, h = wall thickness), the initial effect of left-ventricular hyper-
trophy is to reduce or maintain wall stress as the intraventricular pressures increase. Initially,the hypertrophy is adaptive, but eventually the ventricle fails. Reasons for this failure aremultifactorial. Thickened myocardium increases back pressure in the coronary circulationthereby reducing coronary perfusion, leading to ischemia. In addition, diastolic pressuresare lower when there is severe aortic regurgitation, which further decreases coronary perfu-sion. Myocardial oxygen consumption increases when there is ventricular hypertrophy as aresult of increased mass and contractility. In chronic aortic regurgitation, the equilibrationof end-diastolic left-ventricular and aortic pressures exacerbates left-ventricular remodelingand will cause premature closure of the mitral valve or functional mitral regurgitation.
V-84. The answer is D.   (Chap. 230)   Mild mitral stenosis may be followed yearly unless there
has been systemic embolization or severe pulmonary hypertension has developed (pulmo-nary arterial pressure >50 mmHg at rest or >60 mmHg with exercise). Diagnosing paroxys-mal atrial ﬁbrillation with a 24-h monitor is an option if there is no evidence of pulmonaryhypertension. There is no evidence that percutaneous or surgical repair of mitral stenosis isbeneﬁcial for slight or no functional impairment. Coronary assessment with CT, stress test,or arteriogram is not usually necessary in males <45 years or females <55 years without asigniﬁcant risk factor proﬁle or unless symptoms are suggestive of coronary artery disease.
V-85. The answer is E.   (Chap. 236)   The most accepted hypothesis to describe the pathophysi-
ology of the metabolic syndrome involves an overabundance of free fatty acids and ensuinginsulin resistance. Insulin resistance is thought to be a mediator of many of the other as-pects of the metabolic syndrome, including hypertension and hyperglycemia. Free fatty ac-ids are derived mainly from adipose tissue. Increases in visceral obesity are thought to bemore harmful than subcutaneous stores because of the direct effect of free fatty acids onthe liver from the visceral stores. The inﬂammatory milieu of the metabolic syndrome isenhanced by the overproduction of the proinﬂammatory cytokines by the expanded adi-pose tissue. Treating hypertension, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, and the oxidative stress ofthe proinﬂammatory state is important when treating metabolic syndrome. However, adi-pose tissue loss is the primary approach to treating the underlying cause of the disorder.
V-86. The answer is F .   (Chap. 220)   When a murmur of uncertain cause is identiﬁed on phys-
ical examination, a variety of physiologic maneuvers can be used to assist in the elucida-tion of the cause. Commonly used physiologic maneuvers include change withrespiration, Valsalva maneuver, position, and exercise. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,there is asymmetric hypertrophy of the interventricular septum, which creates a dynamicoutﬂow obstruction. Maneuvers that decrease left-ventricular ﬁlling will cause an in-crease in the intensity of the murmur, whereas those that increase left-ventricular ﬁllingwill cause a decrease in the murmur. Of the interventions listed, both standing and a Val-salva maneuver will decrease venous return and subsequently decrease left ventricularﬁlling, resulting in an increase in the loudness of the murmur of hypertrophic cardiomy-
224 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
opathy. Alternatively, squatting increases venous return and thus decreases the murmur.
Maximum handgrip exercise also results in a decreased loudness of the murmur.
V-87. The answer is C.   (Chap. e8)   Causes of mid-systolic murmurs include aortic stenosis,
aortic sclerosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HOCM), coarctation of the aorta, andpulmonary valve stenosis. In the obstructive form of HOCM, maneuvers that increasethe amount of outﬂow obstruction will increase the intensity of the murmur. Outﬂowobstruction is increased by decreasing preload, which occurs in standing, performing aValsalva maneuver, or with the administration of vasodilators. Increasing preload bysquatting or passive leg raise will lead to reduction of outﬂow tract obstruction and a di-minished murmur. The murmur of HOCM will also decrease with increasing afterload(vasopressors) or decreasing contractility (beta blockers). The murmur of aortic stenosisis typically in the right second intercostal space and radiates to the carotids. Valsalva ma-neuver will classically lead to a decreased aortic stenosis murmur. The murmur of con-genital pulmonic stenosis is in the right second intercostal space. There is often aparasternal lift. Mitral valve prolapse causes a late systolic murmur usually introduced byan ejection click. It does not cause a crescendo-decrescendo murmur. Chronic mitral re-gurgitation causes a holosystolic murmur that radiates to the apex.
V-88. The answer is B.   (Chap. 219)   Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the
United States. Many patients have undiagnosed cardiovascular disease and therefore areat unsuspected risk for perioperative cardiac morbidity, deﬁned as perioperative MI, pul-monary edema, or ventricular tachycardia. Multivariable analysis ﬁrst proposed by Gold-man and colleagues identiﬁed several risk factors, including age over 70 years, an MIwithin the last 6 months, evidence of aortic stenosis or pulmonary edema on exam, andabnormalities within the electrocardiogram or laboratory analysis, as well as the type ofsurgical procedure being performed, with an emergency surgery being more highly asso-ciated with complication risk. In this patient the only risk is age over 70 years. The pres-ence of two to three PVCs per minute is within the normal range. His hypertension,hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus, although signiﬁcant, were not identiﬁed asindependent risk factors. Therefore, this patient’s risk of serious complication is ~0.6%.
V-89. The answer is C.   (Chap. 22)   Although ventricular tachycardia is classically associated
with ischemic heart disease, in which scarred myocardium provides a substrate for reen-trant tachyarrhythmias, other cardiac lesions put a patient at risk for ventricular tachy-cardia. Notably, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, aortic stenosis, and long QTsyndrome carry an increased risk for ventricular tachycardia. Atrial myxoma, which cancause syncope by obstructing blood ﬂow with resultant decreased cardiac output, is notassociated with ventricular tachycardia.
V-90.  and.  V-91.  The answers are A and D.   (Chaps. 335 and 337)   The scenario describes a young
patient with severe hypertension and should prompt consideration of secondary causes ofhypertension. The episodic symptoms and orthostasis despite marked hypertension aresuggestive of pheochromocytoma. Thus, the most appropriate management of this patientshould include an α-adrenergic receptor blocker. Phentolamine and nitroprusside are two
agents that can be used intravenously in the setting of hypertensive crises. This patientshould be managed as such as she has evidence of increased intracranial pressure on oph-thalmologic examination. An oral α-adrenergic blocker is available in the form of phen-
oxybenzamine. The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is best made by 24-h urine collectionfor metanephrines and vanillylmandelic acid. Plasma catecholamines are elevated in pa-tients with pheochromocytoma, but the routine measurement of these levels for diagnosisis confounded by the wide variation in levels associated with various stressors. If plasmacatecholamines are to be used, the levels must be drawn with the patient at rest for at least30 minutes and drawn through an indwelling intravenous catheter. False-positive resultsare common. Abdominal CT imaging can also be adjunctive to assess for an adrenal or pe-riaortic mass associated with pheochromocytoma but is not diagnostic without concurrentdemonstration of elevated catecholamines. Measurement of 5-HIAA and renin levels isdone for diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome and primary hyperaldosteronism, respectively.
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 225
V-92. The answer is D.   (Chap. 219)   Cardiovascular disease remains the top cause of death in
the United States and is responsible for 40% of all deaths. Cardiovascular disease is more
prevalent with age, affecting only 5% at age 20 with a rise to 75% at age >75 years. Al-though age-adjusted death rates for cardiovascular disease have declined by two-thirdssince 1965, the actual number of hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease and congestiveheart failure are increasing as more individuals are surviving an initial heart attack to livewith chronic cardiovascular disease and heart failure. The absolute number of deaths inmen due to cardiovascular disease is falling. However, in women, this number continues torise. In 2002, it was estimated by the American Heart Association that 32 million womenand 30 million men had cardiovascular disease. Heart disease is responsible for 43% ofdeaths in females and 37% of deaths in males. Cardiovascular disease in women is morelikely to present atypically without chest pain and is also more likely to be due to dysfunc-tion of the microcirculation and thus less amenable to current interventional therapies.
V-93.  and . V-94.  The answers are C and C.   (Chap. 226)   The patient’s rhythm is torsade de pointes,
with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and QRS complexes with variations in amplitudeand cycle length giving the appearance of oscillation about an axis. T orsades de pointes is as-sociated with a prolonged QT interval; thus, anything that is associated with a prolonged QTcan potentially cause torsade. Most commonly, electrolyte disturbances such as hypokalemiaand hypomagnesemia, phenothiazines, ﬂuoroquinolones, antiarrhythmic drugs, tricyclicantidepressants, intracranial events, and bradyarrhythmias are associated with this malig-nant arrhythmia. Management, besides stabilization, which may require electrical cardiover-sion, consists of removing the offending agent. In addition, success in rhythm termination orprevention has been reported with the administration of magnesium as well as overdriveatrial or ventricular pacing, which will shorten the QT interval. Beta blockers are indicatedfor patients with congenital long QT syndrome but are not indicated in this patient.
V-95. The answer is E.   (Chap. 238)   Standard therapy for a patient with unstable angina or
non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) includes aspirin and clo-pidogrel. If an anticoagulant is added, enoxaparin has been shown to be superior to un-fractionated heparin in reducing recurrent cardiac events. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIainhibitors have also been shown to be beneﬁcial in treating unstable angina/NSTEMI.Eptiﬁbatide, tiroﬁban, and abciximab are beneﬁcial for patients likely to receive percuta-neous intervention. Clinical trials have shown beneﬁt of early invasive strategy in thepresence of high-risk factors such as recurrent rest angina, elevated troponin, new ST-segment depression, congestive heart failure symptoms, rales, mitral regurgitation, posi-tive stress test, ejection fraction < 0.40, decreased blood pressure, sustained ventriculartachycardia, or recent coronary intervention. The presence of ST depressions, rales, andmitral regurgitation puts this patient at high risk. Tissue plasminogen factor is beneﬁcialin ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, not NSTEMI.
V-96. The answer is A.   (Chap. 242)   Ascending aortic dissections require surgical interven-
tion, whereas descending aortic dissections that are uncomplicated may be managedmedically. Indications for intervention for descending dissections acutely include occlu-sion of a major aortic branch with symptoms. For example, paralysis may occur with oc-clusion of the spinal artery or worsening renal failure may occur in the case of dissectionthat involves the renal arteries. Once a descending dissection has been found, intensivemedical management of blood pressure is imperative and should include agents that de-crease cardiac contractility and aortic shear force. Follow-up with CT or MRI imagingevery 6 to 12 months is recommended, and surgical intervention should be considered ifthere is continued advancement despite medical therapy. Finally, patients with Marfan’ssyndrome have increased complications with descending dissections and should be con-sidered for surgical repair, especially if there is concomitant disease in the ascending aortaas demonstrated by aortic root dilation to greater than 50 mm.
V-97. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 221 and e21)   This ECG tracing shows multifocal atrial tachy-
cardia (MAT), right atrial overload, a superior axis, and poor R-wave progression in theprecordial leads. There are varying P-wave morphologies (more than three morpholo-
226 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
gies) and P-P intervals. MAT is most commonly caused by COPD, but other conditions
associated with this arrhythmia include coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure,valvular heart disease, diabetes mellitus, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, azotemia, post-operative state, and pulmonary embolism. Anemia, pain, and myocardial ischemia arealso causes of tachycardia that should be considered when managing a new tachycardia.These states are usually associated with sinus tachycardia.
V-98. The answer is B.   (Chap. 226; Camm and Garratt, 1991.)   Adenosine is currently approved
for the termination of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias at a dose of 6 mg or, if 6mg fails, 12 mg. The primary mechanism of adenosine is to decrease conduction velocitythrough the atrioventricular (A V) node. Thus, it is an ideal drug for acute termination ofregular reentrant supraventricular tachycardia involving the A V node. Side effects may in-clude chest discomfort and transient hypotension. The half-life is extremely short, and theside effects tend to be brief. Patients with wide complex tachycardia suggestive of ventricu-lar tachycardia or known preexcitation syndrome should be treated with agents that de-crease automaticity, such as quinidine and procainamide. However, in patients withapparent ventricular tachycardia who have neither a history of ischemic heart disease norpreexcitation syndrome, adenosine may be a useful diagnostic agent to determine whethera patient has a reentrant tachycardia, in which case the drug may terminate it; an atrialtachycardia, in which case the atrial activity may be unmasked; or a true, preexcited tachy-cardia, in which case adenosine will have no effect. Although adenosine is not the recom-mended primary therapy for patients with wide complex tachyarrhythmia, patients withjunctional tachycardia who have evidence of poor ventricular function or concomitant β-
adrenergic blockade may be reasonable candidates for its use.
V-99. The answer is E.   (Chap. 242)   Descending aortic aneurysms are most commonly asso-
ciated with atherosclerosis. The average growth rate is ~0.1–0.2 cm yearly. The risk ofrupture and subsequent management are related to the size of the aneurysm as well assymptoms related to the aneurysm. However, most thoracic aortic aneurysms are asymp-tomatic. When symptoms do occur, they are frequently related to mechanical complica-tions of the aneurysm causing compression of adjacent structures. This includes thetrachea and esophagus, and symptoms can include cough, chest pain, hoarseness, anddysphagia. The risk of rupture is ~2–3% yearly for aneurysms <4 cm and rises to 7% peryear once the size is greater than >6 cm. Management of descending aortic aneurysms in-cludes blood pressure control. Beta blockers are recommended because they decreasecontractility of the heart and thus decrease aortic wall stress, potentially slowing aneurys-mal growth. Individuals with thoracic aortic aneurysms should be monitored with chestimaging at least yearly, or sooner if new symptoms develop. This can include CT angiog-raphy, MRI, or transesophageal echocardiography. Operative repair is indicated if the an-eurysm expands by >1 cm in a year or reaches a diameter of >5.5–6.0 cm. Endovascularstenting for the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms is a relatively new procedure withlimited long-term results available. The largest study to date included >400 patients witha variety of indications for thoracic endovascular stents. In 249 patients, the indicationfor stent was thoracic aortic aneurysm. This study showed an initial success rate of87.1%, with a 30-day mortality rate of 10%. However, if the procedure was done emer-gently, the mortality rate at 30 days was 28%. At 1 year, data were available on only 96 ofthe original 249 patients with degenerative thoracic aneurysms. In these individuals, 80%continued to have satisfactory outcomes with stenting and 14% showed growth of the an-eurysm ( LJ Leurs, J Vasc Surg 40:670, 2004 ). Ongoing studies with long-term follow-up
are needed before endovascular stenting can be recommended for the treatment of tho-racic aortic aneurysms, although in individuals who are not candidates for surgery, stent-ing should be considered.
V-100. The answer is C.   (Chap. 225)   The atrioventricular node is supplied by the posterior
descending coronary artery in 90% of the population. Furthermore, this artery in themajority of the population arises from the right coronary artery. Thus, a patient who pre-sents as this one does with symptoms consistent with an acute coronary syndrome and
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 227
who has a Mobitz type II second-degree block probably has signiﬁcant ischemia in the
right coronary artery. Right coronary artery transmural infarct is manifest most com-monly by ST elevation in II, III, and aVF. Wellen’s T waves are deep symmetric T-wave in-versions that are seen in either signiﬁcant left main coronary artery stenosis or proximalleft anterior descending artery stenosis.
V-101. The answer is C.   (Chap. 232)   The presentation of this patient is one of acute pericardi-
tis. Acute pericarditis is the most common disease of the pericardium and typically pre-sents as a sharp, intense anterior chest pain. It may be referred to the neck, arms, or leftshoulder and may be pleuritic in nature. The positional nature of the pain is characteris-tic in acute pericarditis. The pain is worse with lying supine and improved with sitting upand leaning forward. A pericardial friction rub is present in 85% of cases of acute peri-carditis. A pericardial friction rub is described as high-pitched, grating, or scratching andis heard throughout the cardiac cycle. The ECG, shown here, classically shows elevationof the ST segment in the limb leads and V
2–V6 with reciprocal depression of the ST seg-
ment in aV R and sometimes V 1. In addition, the PR segment is depressed in all leads ex-
cept aV R and V 1, where it may be elevated. Mild elevations in cardiac enzymes may be
seen. An echocardiogram should be performed if there is suspicion of a possible effusion.Treatment of acute pericarditis involves rest and anti-inﬂammatory treatment. Aspirin ornonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs in high doses are most commonly used. Alterna-tive treatments include colchicine, glucocorticoids, and intravenous immunoglobulin(IVIg). IVIg is indicated for pericarditis due to cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, or parvovi-rus. As this patient is in severe pain, reassurance only is not the best option but would bea possible treatment if panic attack were suspected. The other choices are utilized in thecase of unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction and should not be utilized in thispatient. Both heparin and reteplase would increase the risk of developing a hemorrhagicpericardial effusion. Cardiac catheterization is an unnecessary procedure.
V-102. The answer is C.   (Chap. 223)   Commotio cordis occurs due to a blunt force injury to
the chest wall that results in an often fatal arrhythmia, most frequently ventricular ﬁbril-lation. While all of the diagnoses listed are causes of sudden cardiac death in young indi-viduals, commotio cordis is the likely diagnosis because of the occurrence of the injury inrelation to blunt trauma to the chest wall. In contrast to cardiac contusion (contusioncordis), the force of the injury is insufﬁcient to cause cardiac contusion or injury to theribs or chest wall. All of the other choices would result in abnormalities in the ECG, and afamily history of sudden cardiac death is frequent.
In animal studies, commotio cordis has been found to occur when the blunt force is
applied at 20–50 mph and only during speciﬁc timing within the cardiac cycle ( C Madias
et al: J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 18:115, 2007; MS Link et al: N Engl J Med 338:1805, 1998 ).
If the force were delivered during the upstroke of the T wave (10–30 msec before thepeak), ventricular ﬁbrillation would frequently result. If the force were applied during theQRS (depolarization), transient complete heart block might occur ( MS Link et al: N Engl
J Med 338:1805, 1998). In reported case series, the survival of commotio cordis is only15%. Deﬁbrillation is most successful if applied within 3 min.
V-103. The answer is C.   (Chap. 231)   This patient's murmur is due to hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy (HCM). A normal S
2, the location of the murmur, the absence of radiation to the
neck, and being loudest at the lower left sternal border make aortic sclerosis or aortic ste-nosis less likely. These murmurs are usually heard best in the second right intercostalspace. Maneuvers such as going from standing to squatting and passively raising the legsdecrease the gradient across the outﬂow tract and intensity of the murmur due to in-creased preload. Amyl nitrate causes a decrease in systemic vascular resistance and arte-rial pressure. The murmur of HCM increases in intensity while there is less regurgitationacross the mitral valve and the murmur of mitral regurgitation gets softer. Right-sidedmurmurs, except for the pulmonic ejection “click” of pulmonary stenosis, usually in-crease in intensity during inspiration.
228 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
V-104. The answer is C.   (Chap. 236)   Reversing insulin resistance and hyperglycemia can be
achieved by lifestyle modiﬁcations, metformin or other biguanide medications, and/or
thiazolidinedione medications. Of the medications, only the thiazolidinediones improveinsulin-mediated glucose uptake in the muscle and adipose tissue. The mechanism of ac-tion of metformin is uncertain, but it appears to work by reducing hepatic gluconeogen-esis and intestinal absorption of glucose. In a large trial of lifestyle modiﬁcations andmetformin in the prevention of diabetes (Diabetes Prevention Program), subjects in thelifestyle arm of the trial had a more signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of diabetes thanthose assigned to metformin. In resource-poor settings and the developing world, life-style modiﬁcations have also been shown to be more cost-effective than metformin forpreventing diabetes.
V-105. The answer is E.   (Chap. 228)   Approximately 3000 heart transplants are performed
each year in the United States. Generally the recipients do well, with survival rates of 76%at 3 years and an average transplant “half-life” of 9.3 years. However, certain complica-tions are common with the necessary immunosuppression, including an increased risk ofmalignancy and infections. Additionally, patients are at risk of rejection of the trans-planted organ that can be acute or chronic. Chronic cardiac transplant rejection mani-fests as coronary artery disease, with characteristic long, diffuse, and concentric stenosisseen on angiography. It is thought that these changes represent chronic rejection of thetransplanted organ. The only deﬁnitive therapy is retransplantation. Bradyarrhythmiasare not known to occur more frequently in transplant recipients.
V-106. The answer is C.   (Chap. 238)   Although this patient has positive cardiac biomarkers
that could represent myocardial ischemia, in patients with an unclear history of angina,low levels of these biomarkers may not always indicate an acute coronary syndrome.Common alternative diagnoses in this setting include exacerbations of congestive heartfailure, myocarditis, and pulmonary embolism. This patient has atypical features of hischest pain for angina: lasting for more than minutes at a time, nonexertional. In a younghost, without other signiﬁcant risk factors, atherosclerotic coronary artery disease wouldbe less likely, especially if the history is atypical. Myocarditis is a diagnosis of exclusion;however, ST-segment elevations throughout the ECG with PR interval depressions sug-gest myocarditis. Esophageal spasm may mimic cardiac pain; however, it would not beexpected to cause the described ECG abnormalities nor the positive cardiac biomarkers.
V-107. The answer is E.   (Chap. 235)   Although tight glycemic control clearly decreases the risk
of the microvascular complications of diabetes (renal function, retinopathy), demonstra-tion of a beneﬁt for myocardial infarction or stroke is less compelling. However, otherfactors in the management of these patients have been shown to decrease risk. These fac-tors include the use of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors over all ranges of LDL cholesterol;gemﬁbrazil, particularly in patients with the metabolic syndrome; strict control of hyper-tension; and the use of an antihypertensive agent that inhibits the actions of angiotensinII, such as an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin receptor blocker.
V-108. The answer is E.   (Chap. 220)   During normal inspiration there is a small, less than 10
mmHg decrease in systolic pressure. In several disease states, notably severe obstructivelung disease, pericardial tamponade, and superior vena cava obstruction, an accentua-tion of this normal ﬁnding can occur. Indeed, in the most pronounced cases the periph-eral pulse may not be palpable during inspiration.
V-109. The answer is D.   (Chap. 232)   This patient’s presentation and physical examination are
most consistent with the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. The most common causeof constrictive pericarditis worldwide is tuberculosis, but given the low incidence of tu-berculosis in the United States, constrictive pericarditis is a rare condition in this country.With the increasing ability to cure Hodgkin’s disease with mediastinal irradiation, manycases of constrictive pericarditis in the United States are in patients who received curativeradiation therapy 10–20 years prior. These patients are also at risk for premature coronaryartery disease. Risks for these complications include dose of radiation and radiation win-
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 229
dows that include the heart. Other rare causes of constrictive pericarditis are recurrent
acute pericarditis, hemorrhagic pericarditis, prior cardiac surgery, mediastinal irradia-tion, chronic infection, and neoplastic disease. Physiologically, constrictive pericarditis ischaracterized by the inability of the ventricles to ﬁll because of the noncompliant pericar-dium. In early diastole, the ventricles ﬁll rapidly, but ﬁlling stops abruptly when the elasticlimit of the pericardium is reached. Clinically, patients present with generalized malaise,cachexia, and anasarca. Exertional dyspnea is common, and orthopnea is generally mild.Ascites and hepatomegaly occur because of increased venous pressure. In rare cases, cir-rhosis may develop from chronic congestive hepatopathy. The jugular venous pressure iselevated, and the neck veins fail to collapse on inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign). Heartsounds may be mufﬂed. A pericardial knock is frequently heard. This is a third heart-sound that occurs 0.09–0.12 s after aortic valve closure at the cardiac apex. Right heartcatheterization would show the “square root sign” characterized by an abrupt y descent
followed by a gradual rise in ventricular pressure. This ﬁnding, however, is not pathogno-monic of constrictive pericarditis and can be seen in restrictive cardiomyopathy of anycause. Echocardiogram shows a thickened pericardium, dilatation of the inferior venacava and hepatic veins, and an abrupt cessation of ventricular ﬁlling in early diastole. Peri-cardial resection is the only deﬁnitive treatment of constrictive pericarditis. Diuresis andsodium restriction are useful in managing volume status preoperatively, and paracentesismay be necessary. Operative mortality ranges from 5–10%. Underlying cardiac function isnormal; thus, cardiac transplantation is not indicated. Pericardiocentesis is indicated fordiagnostic removal of pericardial ﬂuid and cardiac tamponade, which is not present onthe patient’s echocardiogram. Mitral valve stenosis may present similarly with anasarca,congestive hepatic failure, and ascites. However, pulmonary edema and pleural effusionsare also common. Examination would be expected to demonstrate a diastolic murmur,and echocardiogram should show a normal pericardium and a thickened immobile mi-tral valve. Mitral valve replacement would be indicated if mitral stenosis were the cause ofthe patient’s symptoms.
V-110. The answer is A.   (Chap. 266)   This patient is presenting in pulmonary edema and car-
diogenic shock due to acute myocardial infarction (MI). Given the distribution of ST-segment elevation, the left anterior descending artery is the most likely artery occluded.Initial management should include high-dose aspirin, heparin, and stabilization of bloodpressure. Initial management of acute MI also includes use of nitroglycerin and betablockers such as metoprolol in most individuals, but are contraindicated in this individu-als because of his profound hypotension. In addition, use of furosemide for the treatmentof pulmonary edema is also contraindicated because of the degree of hypotension. Intra-venous ﬂuids should be used with caution as the patient also has evidence of pulmonaryedema. The best choice for treatment of this patient’s hypotension is aortic counterpulsa-tion. Aortic counterpulsation requires placement of an intraaortic balloon pump percu-taneously into the femoral artery. The sausage-shaped balloon inﬂates during earlydiastole, augmenting coronary blood ﬂow, and collapses during early systole, markedlydecreasing afterload. In contrast to vasopressors and inotropic agents, aortic counterpul-sation decreases myocardial oxygen consumption. Both dobutamine and norepinephrinecan increase myocardial oxygen demand and worsen ischemia.
V-111. The answer is D.   (Chap. 266)   This patient is presenting with right ventricular (RV)
myocardial infarction. The usual clinical features of right ventricular infarction are hy-potension, elevated right heart ﬁlling pressures, absence of pulmonary congestion, andevidence of RV dilatation and dysfunction. In most cases of RV infarction, the vessel in-volved is the right coronary artery, which manifests as ST elevation in leads II, III, andaV
F. When RV infarction occurs, ST depression is commonly seen in V 1 and V 2. An elec-
trocardiogram with the precordial leads placed on the right side of the chest demon-strates ST elevation in RV
4. The initial treatment of hypotension of RV infarction is IV
ﬂuids to raise the central venous pressure to 10–15 mmHg. If ﬂuid administration fails toalleviate the hypotension, sympathomimetic agents or aortic counterpulsation can beused. However, care must be taken to avoid excess ﬂuid administration, which would
230 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
shift the interventricle septum to the left and further impede cardiac output. A trans-
venous pacemaker would be useful if the hypotension were related to heart block or pro-found bradycardia, which can be associated with right coronary artery ischemia.
V-112. The answer is C.   (Chap. 267)   Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is deﬁned as death due to
cardiac causes heralded by the abrupt loss of consciousness within 1 h of onset of acutesymptoms. Sudden cardiac death accounts for about 50% of all cardiac deaths, and ofthese, two-thirds are initial cardiac events or occur in populations with previously knownheart disease who are considered to be relatively low risk. The most common electricalmechanism of SCD is ventricular ﬁbrillation, accounting for 50–80% of cardiac arrests.The risk of SCD rises with age and is greater in men and individuals with a history of cor-onary artery disease. In addition, several inherited conditions increase the risk of SCD,including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, right ventricular dysplasia, and long-QT syn-dromes, among others. A strong parental history of sudden cardiac death as a presentinghistory of coronary artery disease increases the likelihood of a similar presentation in anoffspring. Interestingly, 70–80% of men who die from SCD have preexisting healed MIswhile only 20–30% have had recent acute MI. On autopsy, individuals who die of SCDmost commonly show longstanding atherosclerotic disease as well as evidence of an un-stable coronary lesion. When this is considered with the fact that most individuals do nothave pathologic evidence of an acute MI by pathology, this suggests that transient is-chemia is the mechanism of onset of the fatal arrhythmia. Rapid intervention and resto-ration of circulation is important for survival in SCD. Within 5 min, the likelihood ofsurviving SCD is only 25–30% for out-of-hospital arrests.
V-113. The answer is C.   (Chap. 267)   Immediate deﬁbrillation should be the initial choice of
action in the treatment of sudden cardiac arrest due to ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF) orventricular tachycardia (VT). Deﬁbrillation should occur prior to endotracheal intuba-tion or placement of intravenous access. If the time to potential deﬁbrillation is <5 min,the medical team should proceed immediately to deﬁbrillation at 300–360 J if amonophasic deﬁbrillator is used (150 J if a biphasic deﬁbrillator is used). If there is >5-min delay to deﬁbrillation, then brief CPR should be given prior to deﬁbrillation. A sin-gle shock should be given with immediate resumption of CPR for 60–90 s before deliver-ing additional shocks. After each shock, CPR should be given without delay. Even if thereis return of a perfusable rhythm, there is often a delayed return of pulse because of myo-cardial stunning. If the patient remains in VF or pulseless VT after initial deﬁbrillation,the patient should be intubated and have IV access attained while CPR is performed.Once IV access is obtained, the initial drug of choice is either epinephrine, 1 mg, or vaso-pressin, 40 units. Amiodarone is a second-line agent.
V-114. The answer is C.   (Chap. 267; J Nolan et al: Circulation 108:118, 2003.)   In 2002, two stud-
ies conducted in Europe and Australia conﬁrmed the beneﬁt of therapeutic hypothermiafollowing out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. In these trials, patients were rapidly cooled to32–34°C and maintained at these temperatures for the initial 12–24 h. Individuals who re-ceived therapeutic hypothermia were 40–85% more likely to have good neurologic out-comes upon hospital discharge. In addition, therapeutic hypothermia also decreased in-hospital morality. Time to initial deﬁbrillation of >5 min is associated with no more thana 25–30% survival rate, and survival continues to decrease linearly from 1 to 10 min.Deﬁbrillation within 5 minutes has the greatest likelihood for good neurologic outcomes.Of the medications used in treatment of cardiac arrest due to ventricular ﬁbrillation orpulseless ventricular tachycardia, none have been demonstrated to have any effects onneurologic outcome.
V-115. The answer is B.   (Chap. e20)   Adenosine technetium99m and thallium201 scans are fre-
quently used for further evaluation of cardiac disease via stress testing. Pharmacologicagents used in cardiac stress testing are either vasodilators (adenosine, dipyridamole) or in-otropic agents (dobutamine). When vasodilator agents are used, ischemic myocardium de-velops as normal coronary artery segments dilate in response to the drug, whereas ﬁxedcoronary lesions are unable to fully dilate. This causes a diversion of blood away from areas
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 231
with ﬁxed coronary lesions, a phenomenon known as coronary steal . Alternatively, inotro-
pic agents induce stress by causing increased myocardial oxygen demand, and ischemia is
diagnosed by the failure to increase blood ﬂow in response to this stress. Using radionucle-ide labeled perfusion agents, images of the heart are taken following the stress-inducingagent and with rest. Reversible ischemia, indicative of coronary artery ischemia, is demon-strated by lack of perfusion with stress, but perfusion is present at rest. In the images de-picted in the ﬁgure, there is no evidence of reperfusion of the affected area upon rest. Theseimages are typical of an old myocardial infarction resulting in scar formation and is de-scribed as a ﬁxed defect . Tissue attenuation due to obesity or breast tissue is a particular
problem, especially with the use of thallium. When tissue attenuation occurs, it typicallyappears as a reversible defect and is a cause of a false-positive stress test. An apical aneurysmmay be difﬁcult to ascertain by thallium images, but typically there should be evidence ofballooning of the cardiac apex outward and distortion of the cardiac silhouette, which isnot seen here.
V-116. The answer is B.   (Chap. 238)   Patients with unstable angina/non-ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI) exhibit a wide spectrum of risk of death, MI, or ur-gent revascularization. Risk stratiﬁcation tools, such as the TIMI risk score, are useful foridentifying patients who beneﬁt from an early invasive strategy and those who are bestsuited for a more conservative approach. The TIMI risk score is composed of seven inde-pendent risk factors: Age ≥65, at least three cardiovascular risk factors, prior stenosis
>50%, ST-segment deviation ≥0.5 mm, at least two anginal events in <24 h, aspirin usage
in the past 7 days, and elevated cardiac markers. Aspirin resistance can occur in 5–10% ofpatients and is more common among those taking lower doses of aspirin. Having unstableangina despite aspirin usage suggests aspirin resistance. Use of a beta-agonist and a diureticdo not confer an independent risk for death, MI, or need for urgent revascularization.
V-117. The answer is D.   (Chap. 238)   Although this patient has positive cardiac biomarkers that
could represent myocardial ischemia, in patients with an unclear history of angina, lowlevels of these biomarkers may not always indicate an acute coronary syndrome. Commonalternative diagnoses in this setting include exacerbations of congestive heart failure, myo-carditis, and pulmonary embolism. This patient has atypical features of his chest pain forangina, with it lasting for more than minutes at a time and being nonexertional. In ayoung host, without other signiﬁcant risk factors, atherosclerotic coronary artery diseasewould be less likely, especially if the history is atypical. Myocarditis is a diagnosis of exclu-sion; however, ST-segment elevations throughout the ECG with PR-interval depressionssuggest myocarditis. Esophageal spasm may mimic cardiac pain; however, it would not beexpected to cause the described ECG abnormalities nor the positive cardiac biomarkers.
V-118. The answer is A.   (Chap. 238)   In 1959, Prinzmetal and colleagues described a syndrome
of angina that occurs at rest but not usually with exertion, associated with transient ST-segment elevation. The pathophysiology is due to focal epicardial coronary artery vaso-spasm. While the exact mechanism is not clear, proximal nonobstructive coronaryplaques are usually present. It is associated with other vasospastic disorders such as mi-graine, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and aspirin-induced asthma. Patients typically areyounger with less coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease than those withtypical angina or non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. The coronary vaso-spasm responds to nitrates or calcium channel blockers. The vasospasm is associatedwith ST-segment elevations on the 12-lead surface electrocardiogram. Cold water inges-tion may exacerbate symptoms by causing further vasospasm. Prinzmetal’s angina is notassociated with autoimmunity, HLA B27 positivity, or Helicobacter pylori  infection.
V-119. The answer is E.   (Chap. 324)   Amyloidosis is in the differential diagnosis of a patient
with newly diagnosed heart failure. The cardiac examination is not speciﬁc for cardiacamyloid, but accessory ﬁndings such as neurologic involvement, low voltage on the ECGand an elevated globulin fraction (total protein – albumin ≥ 4 mg/dL) are suggestive of car-
diac amyloid. Echocardiographic ﬁndings include left ventricular hypertrophy, dilatedatria, thickened interatrial septum, and a “starry-sky” appearance of the myocardium. The
232 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
starry-sky appearance is rarely seen using contemporary ultrasound technology. Focal my-
ocardial wall motion abnormalities (akinesis) are more suggestive of coronary artery dis-ease. Valvular heart disease can cause heart failure if left uncorrected. This patient’smurmur is characteristic of mitral regurgitation and is not consistent with aortic stenosis.Protrusion of the left ventricular apex with hypercontractility of the base is characteristicof stress cardiomyopathy, which is usually accompanied by clinical ﬁndings suggestingacute heart failure and ECG ﬁndings suggesting acute anterior myocardial infarction.
V-120. The answer is C.   (Chap. 324)   Amyloidosis is a term for diseases that are due to the ex-
tracellular deposition of insoluble protein ﬁbrils. The speciﬁc diseases are deﬁned by thebiochemical nature of the protein in the ﬁbril deposits. Primary systemic amyloidosis(AL) is amyloid composed of immunoglobulin light chains and is usually due to a plasmacell dyscrasia. Bence-Jones protein is often in the urine of patients with plasma cell dys-crasia. Bone marrow biopsy is indicated when AL is diagnosed. AA (secondary amyloido-sis) is due to an accumulation of serum amyloid A protein and occurs in the setting ofchronic inﬂammatory or infectious diseases. Alzheimer’s disease is caused by accumula-tion of A β protein. Neurocognitive testing may be helpful in patients diagnosed with
early cognitive decline. There is currently no clinically available test for early accumula-tion of A β protein. Mutant transthyretin (prealbumin) is the protein usually found in the
ﬁbril deposits of the familial amyloidoses (AF). The disease is transmitted in an autoso-mal dominant fashion, although sporadic cases occur. Typical symptoms include neu-ropathy, cardiomyopathy, and autonomic neuropathy. Without intervention, survival istypically 5–15 years. Orthotopic liver transplantation removes the source of variant pro-tein production and provides a source of normal protein production. While neuropathyusually improves, cardiomyopathy may not. Screening family members is important forcounseling family members who may also be affected.
V-121. The answer is C.   (Chap. 226)   There are three main mechanisms by which arrhythmias
are initiated and maintained: automaticity, afterdepolarizations, and reentry. Automatic-ity, such as seen with sinus tachycardia, atrial premature complexes, and some atrial ta-chycardias, is due to an increase in the slope of phase 4 of the action potential. Thedepolarization threshold is reached more quickly and repeatedly. Afterdepolarizations areassociated with an increase in cellular calcium accumulation, leading to repeated myocar-dial depolarization during phase 3 (early) and phase 4 (delayed) of the action potential.Early afterdepolarizations may be related to the initiation of torsades de pointes. Delayedafterdepolarizations are responsible for arrhythmias related to digoxin toxicity and forcatecholamine-induced ventricular tachycardia. Reentry is due to inhomogeneities inmyocardial conduction and refractory periods. With reentry, conduction is blocked inone pathway, allowing slow conduction in the other. This allows for sufﬁcient delay sothat the blocked site has time for reentry and propagation of the tachycardia within thetwo pathways. Reentry appears to be the mechanism for most supraventricular and ven-tricular tachycardias.
V-122. The answer is C.   (Chap. 226)   The mechanisms for atrial ﬁbrillation initiation and
maintenance are still debated; however, there are anatomic structures that play a role inboth of these processes. Muscularized tissue at the oriﬁces of the pulmonary vein inletsare the predominant anatomic drivers of atrial ﬁbrillation, although metabolic distur-bances (e.g., hyperthyroidism, inﬂammation, infection) are also very common. Radiofre-quency ablation of the tissue in the area of the pulmonary vein inlets can terminate atrialﬁbrillation; however, recurrences are not uncommon and other anatomic drivers may bepresent. The left atrial appendage is an important site of thrombus formation in patientswith atrial ﬁbrillation. Any focus within the left or right atrium can be a focus of reentryof focal atrial tachycardia, including the mitral annulus or sinus venosus. Increased auto-maticity of the sinus node is the mechanism for sinus tachycardia.
V-123. The answer is B.   (Chap. 226)   Symptoms of atrial ﬁbrillation vary dramatically. The
most common symptom is tachypalpitations; however, the hemodynamic effects ac-count for symptoms of impaired left ventricular ﬁlling. In atrial ﬁbrillation, there is not
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 233
an effective atrial contraction to augment late-diastolic left ventricular ﬁlling. In pa-
tients with impaired ventricular diastolic function, this loss of effective atrial contrac-tion causes impaired left ventricular ﬁlling, increased left atrial ﬁlling pressures, andpulmonary congestion. These hemodynamic effects are more common in the elderlyand in patients with long-standing hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, andobstructive aortic valve disease. The tachycardia of atrial ﬁbrillation further compro-mises left ventricular ﬁlling and increases atrial ﬁlling pressures. Atrial ﬁbrillation mayoccur with acute alcohol intoxication, warming of hypothermic patients, and postoper-ative after thoracic surgery. The magnitude of the hemodynamic effect and symptomswill be related to ventricular rate (slower allows more time for left ventricular ﬁlling)and underlying cardiac function.
V-124. The answer is D.   (Chap. 226)   A common risk scoring system for anticoagulant use in
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation is the CHADS2 scoring system; C = congestive heart fail-
ure, H = hypertension, A = age >75 years, D = diabetes, S = history of stroke. The pres-
ence of any of these risk factors assigns a score of 1, except for stroke, which is worth 2points. Low-risk patients (score of 0, stroke risk 0.5%/year without warfarin) can bemanaged with aspirin alone. High-risk patients (score ≥3, stroke risk ≥5.2%/year without
warfarin) should be managed with warfarin. Intermediate-risk patients (score 1 or 2,stroke risk 1.5% –2.5%/year without warfarin) may be managed with aspirin or warfarin,depending upon the clinician's assessment of risk, the ability to monitor the intensity ofanticoagulation, the patient's risk of bleeding with anticoagulation, and patient prefer-ence. If warfarin is used, the goal INR should be 2–3.
V-125. The answer is A.   (Chap. 226)   Focal atrial tachycardias can be divided into two catego-
ries based on mechanism: automatic and reentry. Sinus tachycardia is the classic auto-matic tachycardia in which onset and termination have a “warm-up” and “slow-down”period, respectively. The P-wave morphology, which initiates the tachycardia of auto-matic tachycardias, is the same as the P wave of the tachycardia, whereas the initiating Pwave of focal reentrant atrial tachycardia is usually different from those of the tachycar-dia. Automatic tachycardias are not reliably initiated by programmed stimulation duringan electrophysiologic study, whereas reentrant atrial tachycardias can be initiated by pro-grammed stimulation or premature beats. Adenosine receptors within sinus and atrio-ventricular nodal tissue are thought to account for the ability of this drug to slow andterminate arrhythmias involving these structures.
V-126. The answer is D.   (Chap. 226)   Anticoagulation is of particular importance for patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation for whom chemical or electrical cardioversion is considered. Ifthe duration of atrial ﬁbrillation is unknown or >24 h, there is an increased risk of anatrial appendage thrombus and subsequent embolization. When DCCV is being con-sidered, one of two strategies is used most often. Intravenous heparin can be initiatedand transesophageal echocardiogram obtained. Once the activated partial thrombo-plastin time is at a therapeutic level, DCCV can be performed if there is no thrombusvisualized on TEE. Alternatively, anticoagulation with warfarin can be initiated imme-diately and continued for at least 3 weeks. If the INR >1.8 on at least two separate occa-sions, DCCV can be safely performed. Using either strategy, anticoagulation must becontinued for at least 1 month after DCCV if the duration of atrial ﬁbrillation has beenprolonged or unknown, due to the increased risk of thrombus formation and emboli-zation after DCCV .
V-127. The answer is D.   (Chap. 226)   Tachycardias that involve an accessory pathway, like
WPW, are at risk for degeneration into 1:1 atrial:ventricular conduction down the acces-sory pathway and subsequent ventricular tachycardia or ﬁbrillation. If the circuit canconduct anterogradely (i.e., down the accessory pathway, up the His-Purkinje tract), thenatrioventricular (A V) nodal blocking agents can precipitate ventricular tachycardia. Witha wide-complex tachycardia, the A V nodal blocking agents (adenosine, digoxin, diltia-zem, verapamil) will not be as effective as the class 1a antiarrhythmic agent procaina-
234 V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
mide. Lidocaine and amiodarone would also be effective agents for treating stable wide-
complex tachycardias.
V-128. The answer is E.   (Chap. 226)   Diagnosing ventricular tachycardia based on the surface
electrocardiogram is challenging. All of the answers above, except for E, are clues sup-porting ventricular tachycardia. In the presence of any interventricular conduction delay,the sinus rhythm QRS duration may be prolonged while the ventricular tachycardia de-polarization pattern may originate from closer to the interventricular septum, resultingin a narrower QRS complex. Other clues supporting ventricular tachycardia include a bi-zarre QRS pattern that does not mimic typical left bundle branch block (LBBB) or rightbundle branch block (RBBB) QRS complexes, delayed activation of the initial phase ofthe QRS complex, a frontal plane axis between –90° and 180° and a prolonged QRS dura-
tion in the presence of an LBBB or RBBB. Fusion beats and atrial capture signify atrio-ventricular dissociation and are the most speciﬁc clues for ventricular tachycardia;however, they are also the least commonly found.
V-129. The answer is C.   (Chap. 227)   The NY Heart Association classiﬁcation is a tool to de-
ﬁne criteria that describe the functional ability and clinical manifestations of patients inheart failure. It is also used in patients with pulmonary hypertension. These criteria havebeen shown to have prognostic value with worsening survival as class increases. They arealso useful to clinicians when reading studies to understand the entry and exclusion crite-ria of large clinical trials. Class I is used for patients with no limiting symptoms; class II forpatients with slight or mild limitation; class III implies no symptoms at rest but dyspneaor angina or palpitations with little exertion; patients are moderately limited; class IV is se-verely limited, so that even minimal activity causes symptoms. Treatment guidelines alsofrequently base recommendations on these clinical stages. This patient has symptoms withmild exertion but is comfortable at rest; therefore he is NY Heart Association class III.
V-130. The answer is B.   (Chap. 227)   Patients with severe congestive heart failure often exhibit
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, deﬁned as intercurrent short periods of hypoventilation and hyper-ventilation. The mechanism is thought to relate to the prolonged circulation time between thelungs and the respiratory control centers in the brain, leading to poor respiratory control ofP
CO2. The degree of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is related to the severity of heart failure. This
pattern of breathing is different from obstructive sleep apnea, which is notable for periods ofloud snoring, apnea, and sudden waking. Patients are also often hypersomnolent during theday. While sleep apnea is managed with weight loss and overnight CPAP , Cheyne-Stokesbreathing is difﬁcult to address as it is often a sign of advanced systolic dysfunction and im-plies a poor prognosis. All efforts to further maximize heart failure management are indi-cated. A sleep study would demonstrate this pattern of breathing, but this history and clinicalpresentation is typical. There is no role for bronchodilators or an electroencephalogram.
V-131. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 220 and 227)   Patients with chronic congestive heart failure
develop substantial lymphatic reserve in their lungs. Consequently, they may not displaysigns of pulmonary edema on physical examination or chest radiograph, even in thepresence of a very elevated left ventricular ﬁlling pressure. The lack of these ﬁndings car-ries a very limited predictive value and does not rule out heart failure. This phenomenonalso occurs in patients with chronic mitral stenosis so is likely an effect of long-standingelevation of pulmonary venous pressure. Acute heart failure will present with bilateralrales on pulmonary examination. However, noncardiac causes of pulmonary edema willalso cause rales, so this ﬁnding is nonspeciﬁc.
V-132. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 222 and 227)   Heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction
is very common but can be challenging to evaluate serially. Each of the described param-eters gives important adjunct information regarding heart function in this type of pa-tient. Left atrial dilatation often implies a chronic elevation in left ventricular diastolicpressures as the atria is relatively compliant and will dilate in this setting. Atrial ﬁbrilla-tion is easily seen on echocardiography and is problematic in these patients as they are of-ten dependent on their atrial kick to maintain preload and therefore cardiac output. Left
V. D ISORDERS OF THE  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 235
ventricular wall thickness and diastolic ﬁlling may imply severity and duration of disease.
Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve with asymmetric septal hypertrophy is a char-acteristic echocardiographic ﬁnding in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
V-133. The answer is A.   (Chap. 227)   Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are useful in heart
failure patients who do not tolerate angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors due tocough or other side effects. Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin pathway reduces left ven-tricular afterload and remodeling. They have been shown to improve symptoms and exer-cise capacity and to reduce need for hospitalization and mortality in patients with systolicheart failure. Calcium channel blockers, particularly ﬁrst-generation medications, mayworsen function in patients with systolic dysfunction. Thiazolidinediones (rosiglitazone,pioglitazone) are associated with ﬂuid retention and may worsen heart failure. NSAID usein patients with a reduced cardiac output may cause acute renal failure. Sotalol has beenshown to increase mortality in patients with left ventricular dysfunction.
V-134. The answer is A.   (Chap. 227)   Because beta blockers take longer to achieve a steady state,
can decrease inotropic function, and cause bradycardia or heart block, the dose of thesemedicines should be escalated slowly. ACE inhibitors are typically increased to dosesachieved in clinical trials at a more rapid rate with careful monitoring of renal function.
V-135. The answer is E.   (Chap. 227; AL Taylor et al: N Eng J Med 351:2049, 2004.)   Isosorbide di-
nitrate/hydralazine in a ﬁxed combination (BiDil) was shown to decrease mortality andhospitalizations in African Americans with impaired left ventricular function (<35–45%)when added to standard heart failure therapy. The drug was approved by the U.S. Foodand Drug Administration in 2005 as the ﬁrst race-speciﬁc drug therapy.
This page intentionally left blank 
237VI. DISORDERS OF THE 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
VI-1.   A patient is evaluated in the emergency department
for peripheral cyanosis. Which of the following is not a
potential etiology?
A. Cold exposure
B. Deep venous thrombosisC. MethemoglobinemiaD. Peripheral vascular diseaseE. Raynaud’s phenomenon
VI-2.   Which of the following associations correctly pairs
clinical scenarios and community-acquired pneumonia(CAP) pathogens?
A. Aspiration pneumonia: Streptococcus pyogenes
B. Heavy alcohol use: atypical pathogens and Staphylo-
coccus aureus
C. Poor dental hygiene: Chlamydia pneumoniae ,Kleb-
siella pneumoniae
D. Structural lung disease: Pseudomonas aeruginosa ,S.
aureus
E. Travel to southwestern United States: Aspergillus  spp.
VI-3.    A 54-year-old female presents to the hospital because of
hemoptysis. She has coughed up approximately 1 teaspoon
of blood for the last 4 days. She has a history of cigarettesmoking. A chest radiogram shows diffuse bilateral inﬁltratespredominantly in the lower lobes. The hematocrit is 30%,and the serum creatinine is 4.0 mg/dL. Both were normalpreviously. Urinalysis shows 2+ protein and red blood cellcasts. The presence of autoantibodies directed against whichof the following is most likely to yield a deﬁnitive diagnosis?
A. Glomerular basement membrane
B. Glutamic acid decarboxylaseC. PhospholipidsD. Smooth muscleE. U1 ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
VI-4.   All the following drugs can cause eosinophilic pneu-
monia except
A. nitrofurantoinB. sulfonamidesC. nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs)D. isoniazidE. amiodarone
VI-5.   A 26-year-old man presents to the clinic with 3 days
of severe sore throat and fever. All of the following sup-port the diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis except
A. cough
B. feverC. pharyngeal exudatesD. positive rapid streptococcal throat antigen testE. tender cervical lymphadenopathy
VI-6.    Which of the following has been shown to decrease
duration of nonspeciﬁc upper respiratory tract symptoms?
A. Azithromycin
B. EchinaceaC. Vitamin CD. ZincE. None of the aboveF. All of the above
VI-7.   A 24-year-old man presents to the emergency room
complaining of shortness of breath and right-sided chestpain. The symptoms began abruptly about 2 hours previ-ously. The pain is worse with inspiration. He denies feversor chills and has not had any leg swelling. He has no pastmedical history but smokes 1 pack of cigarettes daily. Onphysical examination, he is tachypneic with a respiratoryrate of 24 breaths/min. His oxygen saturation is 94% onroom air. Breath sounds are decreased in the right lung,and there is hyperresonance to percussion. A chest radio-graph conﬁrms a 50% pneumothorax of the right lung.What is the best approach for treatment of this patient?
A. Needle aspiration of the pneumothorax
B. Observation and administration of 100% oxygenC. Placement of a large-bore chest tubeD. Referral for thoracoscopy with stapling of blebs and
pleural abrasionVI-4. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
238 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VI-8.   A 23-year-old female complains of dyspnea and
substernal chest pain on exertion. Evaluation for this
complaint 6 months ago included arterial blood gastesting, which revealed pH 7.48, P
O2 79 mmHg, and
PCO 2 31 mmHg. Electrocardiography then showed a
right axis deviation. Chest x-ray now shows enlargedpulmonary arteries but no parenchymal inﬁltrates, anda lung perfusion scan reveals subsegmental defects thatare thought to have a “low probability for pulmonarythromboembolism.” Echocardiography demonstrates rightheart strain but no evidence of primary cardiac disease.The most appropriate diagnostic test now would be
A. open lung biopsy
B. Holter monitoringC. right-heart catheterizationD. transbronchial biopsyE. serum α
1-antitrypsin level
VI-9.    A 53-year-old woman presents to the hospital fol-
lowing an episode of syncope, with ongoing lightheaded-ness and shortness of breath. She had a history ofantiphospholipid syndrome with prior pulmonary em-bolism and has been nonadherent to her anticoagulationrecently. She has been prescribed warfarin, 7.5 mg daily,but reports taking it only intermittently. She does notknow her most recent INR. On presentation to the emer-gency room, she appears diaphoretic and tachypneic.Her vital signs are: blood pressure 86/44 mmHg, heartrate 130 beats/min, respiratory rate 30 breaths/min, Sa
O2
85% on room air. Cardiovascular examination shows aregular tachycardia without murmurs, rubs, or gallops.The lungs are clear to auscultation. On extremity exami-nation, there is swelling of her left thigh with a positiveHoman’s sign. Chest CT angiography conﬁrms a saddlepulmonary embolus with ongoing clot seen in the pelvicveins on the left. Anticoagulation with unfractionatedheparin is administered. After a ﬂuid bolus of 1 L, thepatient’s blood pressure remains low at 88/50 mmHg.Echocardiogram demonstrates hypokinesis of the rightventricle. On 100% non-rebreather mask, the Sa
O2 is
92%. What is the next best step in management of thispatient?
A. Continue current management.
B. Continue IV ﬂuids at 500 mL/hr for a total of 4 L of
ﬂuid resuscitation.
C. Refer for inferior vena cava ﬁlter placement and
continue current management.
D. Refer for surgical embolectomy.E. Treat with dopamine and recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator, 100 mg IV .
VI-10 to VI-13.    Among the following pulmonary function
test results, pick those which are the most likely ﬁnding ineach of the following respiratory disorders:
A. Increased total lung capacity (TLC), decreased vital
capacity (VC), decreased FEV
1/FVC ratioB. Decreased TLC, decreased VC, decreased residual
volume (RV), increased FEV 1/FVC ratio, normal
maximum inspiratory pressure (MIP)
C. Decreased TLC, increased RV , normal FEV 1/FVC ra-
tio, decreased MIP
D. Normal TLC, normal RV , normal FEV 1/FVC ratio,
normal MIP
VI-10.   Myasthenia gravis
VI-11.   Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosisVI-12.   Familial pulmonary hypertensionVI-13.   Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
VI-14.   A 52-year-old female presents with a community-
acquired pneumonia complicated by pleural effusion. A
thoracentesis is performed, with the following results:
Bacterial cultures are sent, but the results are not cur-
rently available. Which characteristic of the pleural ﬂuidis most suggestive that the patient will require tube thora-costomy?
A. Presence of more than 90% polymorphonucleocytes
(PMNs)
B. Glucose less than 100 mg/dL
C. Presence of more than 1000 white blood cellsD. pH less than 7.20E. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) more than two-thirds
of the normal upper limit for serum
VI-15.   A 63-year-old male with a long history of cigarette
smoking comes to see you for a 4-month history of pro-gressive shortness of breath and dyspnea on exertion. Thesymptoms have been indolent, with no recent worsening.He denies fever, chest pain, or hemoptysis. He has a dailycough of 3 to 6 tablespoons of yellow phlegm. The patientsays he has not seen a physician for over 10 years. Physicalexamination is notable for normal vital signs, a pro-longed expiratory phase, scattered rhonchi, elevated jug-ular venous pulsation, and moderate pedal edema.Hematocrit is 49%. Which of the following therapies ismost likely to prolong his survival?
A. Atenolol
B. EnalaprilC. OxygenD. PrednisoneE. TheophyllineAppearance Viscous, cloudy
pH 7.11
Protein 5.8 g/dLLDH 285 IU/LGlucose 66 mg/dLWBC 3800/mm
3
RBC 24,000/mm3
PMNs 93%Gram stain Many PMNs; no organism seenVI-10 to VI-13.   (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 239
VI-16.   A 23-year-old male is climbing Mount Kilimanjaro.
He has no medical problems and takes no medications.
Shortly after beginning the climb, he develops severeshortness of breath. Physical examination shows diffusebilateral inspiratory crackles. Which of the following isthe most likely etiology?
A. Acute interstitial pneumonitis
B. Acute respiratory distress syndromeC. Cardiogenic shockD. Community-acquired pneumoniaE. High-altitude pulmonary edema
VI-17.   Which of the following statements about this condi-
tion is true?
A. Acetazolamide is indicated for the treatment of this
disorder.
B. Older patients are more at risk for this disorder than
are younger patients because hypoxic vasoconstric-
tion is more pronounced as patients age.
C. Oxygen is an ineffective therapy for this disorder.D. Persons who live at high altitudes are not at risk for
this disorder even when they return to a high alti-tude after time spent at sea level.
E. Prevention can be achieved by means of gradual
ascent.
VI-18.   Which of the following organisms is unlikely to be
found in the sputum of a patient with cystic ﬁbrosis?
A. Haemophilus inﬂuenzae
B. Acinetobacter baumannii
C. Burkholderia cepacia
D. Aspergillus fumigatus
E. Staphylococcus aureus
VI-19.   A 63-year-old female is seen in the pulmonary clinic
for evaluation of progressive dyspnea. She underwent sin-
gle-lung transplantation 4 years ago for idiopathic pul-monary ﬁbrosis and did well until the last 6 months,when she noted that her exercise tolerance had decreasedas a result of shortness of breath. She denies fevers, chills,weight loss, or medication noncompliance. The patientdoes have an occasional dry cough. Her current medica-tions include tacrolimus, prednisone, trimethoprim-sul-famethoxazole (TMP-SMX), pantoprazole, diltiazem, andmycophenolate mofetil. She denies any current habits buthas a remote history of tobacco use. Physical examinationis notable for dry crackles on the side of the native lungand decreased breath sounds on the side of the trans-planted lung but no adventitious sounds. Review of pul-monary function testing shows an FEV
1/FVC ratio of
50% of the predicted value and an FEV 1 of 0.91 L. Addi-
tionally, FEV 1 has fallen by 30% progressively over the
last year. Which of the following can ameliorate the fall inFEV
1 in this patient?A. Augmented immunosuppression
B. Reduced immunosuppressionC. Antifungal therapyD. Antiviral therapyE. Administration of α
1 antitrypsin
F. None of the above
VI-20.    A 60-year-old male is seen in the clinic for coun-
seling about asbestos exposure. He is well and has no
symptoms. He also has hypertension, for which hetakes hydrochlorothiazide. The patient smokes onepack of cigarettes a day but has no other habits. He iscurrently retired but worked for 30 years as a pipeﬁtterand says he was around “lots” of asbestos, often with-out wearing a mask or other protective devices. Physi-cal examination is normal except for nicotine stains onthe left second and third ﬁngers. Chest radiographyshows pleural plaques but no other changes. Pulmo-nary function tests, including lung volumes, are nor-mal. Which of the following statements should bemade to this patient?
A. He must quit smoking immediately as his risk of
emphysema is higher than that of other smokers be-
cause of asbestos exposure.
B. He does not have asbestosis.
C. His risk of mesothelioma is higher than that of other
patients with asbestos exposure because he has a
history of tobacco use.
D. He has no evidence of asbestos exposure on chest
radiography.
E. He should undergo biannual chest radiography
screening for lung cancer.
VI-21.    Which of the following patients with community-
acquired pneumonia meet the CURB-65 criteria for hos-pital admission?
A. A 23-year-old man with normal mental status,
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) = 17 mg/dL, respiratory
rate 25 breaths/min, and blood pressure 110/70mmHg
B. A 35-year-old woman with normal mental status,
BUN = 13 mg/dL, respiratory rate 35 breaths/min,and systolic blood pressure 140/80 mmHg
C. A 48-year-old man with normal mental status, BUN
= 25 mg/dL, respiratory rate 32 breaths/min, bloodpressure 110/75 mmHg
D. A 62-year-old woman who is confused, BUN = 15
mg/dL, respiratory rate 25 breaths/min, blood pres-sure 115/65 mmHg
E. A 73-year-old woman with normal mental status,
BUN = 10 mg/dL, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min,blood pressure 145/70 mmHgVI-19. (Continued)
240 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VI-22.   What mode of ventilation is depicted in the graphic
below?
A. Assist control
B. Continuous positive airway pressureC. Pressure controlD. Pressure supportE. Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation
VI-23.   A 67-year-old female is admitted to the hospital
with a hip fracture after a fall. Which of the following reg-imens constitutes appropriate venous thromboembolismprophylaxis for this patient?
A. Intermittent pneumatic compression devices
B. Subcutaneous unfractionated heparinC. Subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparinD. Warfarin, with a target international normalized ra-
tio (INR) of 1.5 to 2.0
E. A and B
VI-24.   A 35-year-old male is seen in the clinic for evalua-
tion of infertility. He has never fathered any children, andafter 2 years of unprotected intercourse his wife has notachieved pregnancy. Sperm analysis shows a normalnumber of sperm, but they are immotile. Past medicalhistory is notable for recurrent sinopulmonary infec-tions, and the patient recently was told that he has bron-chiectasis. Chest radiography is likely to show which ofthe following?
A. Bihilar lymphadenopathy
B. Bilateral upper lobe inﬁltratesC. Normal ﬁndingsD. Situs inversusE. Water balloon–shaped heart
VI-25.   A 78-year-old woman is admitted to the medical in-
tensive care unit with multilobar pneumonia. On initialpresentation to the emergency room, her initial oxygensaturation was 60% on room air and only increased to82% on a non-rebreather face mask. She was in markedrespiratory distress and intubated in the emergencyroom. Upon admission to the intensive care unit, she wassedated and paralyzed. The ventilator is set in the assist-control mode with a respiratory rate of 24, tidal volumeof 6 mL/kg, F
IO2 of 1.0, and positive end-expiratory pres-
sure of 12 cmH 2O. An arterial blood gas measurement is
performed on these settings; the results are pH 7.20,Pa
CO2 of 32 mmHg, and Pa O2 54 mmHg. What is the
cause of the hypoxemia?
A. Hypoventilation alone
B. Hypoventilation and ventilation-perfusion mismatchC. ShuntD. Ventilation-perfusion mismatch
VI-26.   A 17-year-old boy is admitted to the intensive care
unit with fever, jaundice, renal failure, and respiratoryfailure. T en days ago he was part of a community servicegroup from his school that cleaned up a rat-infested al-ley. Two of his colleagues developed a ﬂulike illness withheadache, fever, myalgias, and nausea that has begun toresolve. He developed similar symptoms with the addi-tion of jaundice. On the day of admission he developedshortness of breath. The physical examination is notablefor a temperature of 38.4°C (101.1°F), blood pressure of95/65 mmHg, heart rate of 110/min, respiratory rate of25/min, and oxygen saturation of 92% on 100% facemask. He has notable jaundice and icterus as well as bi-lateral conjunctival suffusion. A chest radiogram showsbilateral diffuse inﬁltrates. Laboratory studies are nota-ble for creatinine 2.5 mg/dL, total bilirubin 12.3 mg/dL,and normal aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanineaminotransferase (ALT), and prothrombin time. Whichof the following antibiotics should be included in histherapy?
A. Ceﬁpime
B. CiproﬂoxacinC. ClindamycinD. PenicillinE. Vancomycin
VI-27.   A 68-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room complaining of dyspnea. She has developed pro-gressive shortness of breath over the past 2 weeks. She hasa slight dry cough and a right-sided pleuritic chest pain.There have been no associated fevers or chills. Shesmokes a pack of cigarettes daily and has done so sincethe age of 18. On physical examination, she appears dysp-neic at rest. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 138/86mmHg, heart rate 92 beats/min, temperature 37.1°C, res-piratory rate 24 breaths/min, and Sa
O2 94% on room air.
There is dullness to percussion halfway up her right lungﬁeld with decreased tactile fremitus. Breath sounds aredecreased without egophony. The examination is other-wise normal. A chest radiograph shows a large free-ﬂow-ing pleural effusion on the right and also suggestsmediastinal lymphadenopathy. The patient undergoesFIGURE VI-22
VI-25. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 241
thoracentesis, and 1500 mL of bloody-appearing ﬂuid is
removed. The results of the pleural ﬂuid are: pH 7.46, redblood cell count too numerous to count, hematocrit 3%,white blood cell count 230/ µL (85% lymphocytes, 10%
neutrophils, 5% mesothelial cells), protein 4.6 g/dL, lac-tate dehydrogenase (LDH) 340 U/L, and glucose 35 mg/dL. The corresponding values in the serum are: protein6.8 g/dL, LDH 360 U/L, and glucose 115 mg/dL. A chestCT performed after the thoracentesis shows residualmoderate pleural effusion with collapse of the right lowerlobe and enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. Which ofthe following tests is most likely to yield the cause of thepleural effusion?
A. Mammography
B. MediastinoscopyC. Pleural ﬂuid cytologyD. Pleural ﬂuid cultureE. Thoracoscopic biopsy of the pleura
VI-28.   A 36-year-old male comes to his primary care
physician complaining of 3 days of worsening head-
ache, left frontal facial pain, and yellow nasal discharge.The patient reports that he has had nasal stufﬁness andcoryza for about 5 days. Past medical history is notableonly for seasonal rhinitis. The physical examination isnotable for a temperature of 37.9°C (100.2°F) and ten-derness to palpation over the left maxillary sinus. Theoropharynx has no exudates, and there is no lymphade-nopathy. Which of the following is the most appropri-ate next intervention?
A. Aspiration of the maxillary sinus
B. Nasal ﬂuticasoneC. Oral amoxicillinD. Serum antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA)
E. Sinus CT scan
VI-29.   Which of the following conditions would be ex-
pected to increase the residual volume of the lung?
A. Bacterial pneumonia
B. Cryptogenic organizing pneumoniaC. EmphysemaD. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosisE. Obesity
VI-30.   A 24-year-old man from Cincinnati, OH, comes
into your clinic requesting treatment for “the ﬂu.” He is inyour town for a business trip. He reports 1 day of chills,sweats, headaches, myalgias, and a nonproductive cough.He has no known occupational exposures but has just re-cently ﬁnished doing structural repairs on his old house.His blood pressure is 106/72 mmHg, heart rate 98 beats/min, temperature 39.5°C, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, and Sa
O2 is 88% on room air. Y ou obtain a chest ra-diograph which shows signs of bilateral pneumonitis andmediastinal lymphadenopathy. An induced sputum silverstain is shown in the ﬁgure (see also Figure VI-30, ColorAtlas). What is the preferred treatment for this patient?
A. Amphotericin
B. CaspofunginC. CiproﬂoxacinD. GlucocorticoidsE. Piperacillin/tazobactam
VI-31.    Match the following vasopressors with the state-
ment that best describes their action on the cardiovascu-
lar system.
1. Dobutamine
2. Low-dose dopamine (2–4 µg/kg per min)
3. Norepinephrine4. Phenylephrine
A. Acts solely at α-adrenergic receptors to cause vaso-
constriction
B. Acts at β
1-adrenergic receptors and dopaminergic
receptors to increase cardiac contractility and heart
rate. It also causes vasodilatation and increasedsplanchnic and renal blood ﬂow
C. Acts at β
1- and, to a lesser extent, β2-adrenergic re-
ceptors to increase cardiac contractility, heart rate,and vasodilatation.
D. Acts at α and β
1-adrenergic receptors to increase
heart rate, cardiac contractility, and vasoconstrictionFIGURE VI-30
VI-27. (Continued) VI-30. (Continued)
242 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VI-32.   What sleep disorder is depicted in the graphic below
(see also Figure VI-32, Color Atlas)? 
A. Cheyne-Stokes respirationB. Central sleep apnea
C. Obstructive sleep apneaD. Periodic limb movement disorder of sleep
VI-33.   A 42-year-old male presents with progressive dyspnea
on exertion, low-grade fevers, and weight loss over 6months. He also is complaining of a primarily dry cough,although occasionally he coughs up a thick mucoid spu-tum. There is no past medical history. He does not smokecigarettes. On physical examination, the patient appearsdyspneic with minimal exertion. The patient’s temperatureis 37.9°C (100.3°F). Oxygen saturation is 91% on room airat rest. Faint basilar crackles are heard. On laboratory stud-ies, the patient has polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemiaand a hematocrit of 52%. A CT scan reveals bilateral alveo-lar inﬁltrates that are primarily perihilar in nature with amosaic pattern. The patient undergoes bronchoscopy withbronchoalveolar lavage. The efﬂuent appears milky. The cy-topathology shows amorphous debris with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive macrophages. What is the diagnosis?
A. Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia
B. Desquamative interstitial pneumonitisC. NocardiosisD. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
E. Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
VI-34.   What treatment is most appropriate at this time?
A. Prednisone and cyclophosphamideB. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleC. PrednisoneD. Whole-lung saline lavageE. Doxycycline
VI-35.   An 86-year-old nursing home resident is brought by
ambulance to the local emergency room. He was foundunresponsive in his bed and 911 was called. Apparently hehad been coughing and complaining of chills for the pastfew days; no further history is available from the nursinghome staff. His past medical history is remarkable for Alz-heimer’s dementia and treated prostate cancer. The emer-gency responders were able to appreciate a faint pulse andobtained a blood pressure of 91/49 mmHg and a heart rateof 120 beats/min. In the emergency room his pressure is88/51 mmHg and heart rate is 131 beats/min. He is moan-ing and obtunded, localizes to pain, and has ﬂat neck veins.Skin tenting is noted. A peripheral IV is placed, specimensfor initial laboratory testing sent off, and electrocardio-gram and chest x-ray are obtained. Anesthesiology hasbeen called to the bedside and is assessing the patient’s air-way. What is the best immediate step in management?
A. Infuse hypertonic saline to increase the rate of vas-
cular ﬁlling.
B. Infuse isotonic crystalloid solution via IV wide open.
C. Initiate IV pressors starting with levophed.D. Infuse a colloidal solution rapidly.E. Transfuse packed red blood cells until hemoglobin is
>10 g/dL.
VI-36.   Which of the following is true regarding hypovole-
mic shock?
A. Loss of 20–40% of the blood volume leads to shock
physiology.
B. Loss of <20% of the blood volume will manifest as
orthostasis.
C. Oliguria is a crucial prognostic sign of impending
vascular collapse.
D. Symptoms of hypovolemic shock differ from those
of hemorrhagic shock.
E. The ﬁrst sign of hypovolemic shock is mental ob-
tundation.
VI-37.   A 24-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
room after attempting suicide with an overdose of heroin.
On arrival at the emergency department in Jacksonville,FL, she is obtunded and has a respiratory rate of 6breaths/min. She is hypotensive with a blood pressure of84/60 mmHg and a heart rate of 80 beats/min. The oxy-gen saturation is 70% on room air. An arterial blood gasis performed showing the following: pH 7.09, Pa
CO2 80
mmHg, Pa O2 42 mmHg. Which of the following state-
ments is true regarding the patient’s arterial blood gas?
A. The patient is hypoxic due to hypoventilation with
an increased A – a (alveolar-arterial) gradient.FIGURE VI-32
VI-32. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 243
B. The patient is hypoxic due to hypoventilation with a
normal A – a gradient.
C. The patient is hypoxic due to shunt with an in-
creased A – a gradient.
D. The patient is hypoxic due to ventilation-perfusion
(V• /Q•) mismatch with an increased A – a gradient.
VI-38.   Which of the following statements best describes the
functional residual capacity of the lung?
A. The volume of gas at which the tendency of the
lungs to collapse (elastic recoil pressure) and the
tendency of the chest wall to expand are equal.
B. The volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the end
of a normal tidal exhalation
C. The volume of gas remaining in the lungs after a
maximal expiratory effort
D. A and BE. A and C
VI-39.   A 49-year-old woman is admitted for an evaluation
of weakness. She complains of fatigue with repetitivemuscle use, with signiﬁcant fatigue and dysphagia by theend of the day. Her activities have been signiﬁcantly lim-ited due to her fatigue, and there is signiﬁcant orthopnea.During her evaluation, laboratory analysis reveals: So-dium 137 meq/L, potassium 3.8 meq/L, chloride 94 meq/L, bicarbonate 31 meq/L. An arterial blood gas shows apH of 7.33, Pa
CO2 60 mmHg, and Pa O2 65 mmHg. A chest
x-ray is interpreted as “poor inspiratory effort.” The oxy-gen saturation is 92% on room air. A ventilation-perfu-sion scan has normal perfusion. Which of the followingtests will most likely identify the cause of this patient’srespiratory acidosis?
A. CT scan of the brain
B. Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxideC. EsophagoscopyD. Forced vital capacity (supine and upright)E. Pulmonary angiogram
VI-40.   The most common cause of a pleural effusion is
A. cirrhosisB. left ventricular failureC. malignancyD. pneumoniaE. pulmonary embolism
VI-41.   A 52-year-old man presents with crushing sub-ster-
nal chest pain. He has a history of coronary artery diseaseand has suffered two non-ST-elevation myocardial in-farctions in the past 5 years, both requiring percutane-ous intervention and intracoronary stent placement. Hiselectrocardiogram shows ST elevations across the precor-dial leads, and he is taken emergently to the catheteriza-tion laboratory. After angioplasty and stent placement heis transferred to the coronary care unit. His vital signs arestable on transfer; however, 20 min after arrival he isfound to be unresponsive. His radial pulse is thready, ex-tremities are cool, and blood pressure is difﬁcult to ob-tain; with a manual cuff it is 65/40 mmHg. The nurseturns to you and asks what you would like to do next.Which of the following accurately represents the physio-logic characteristics of this patient’s condition?
VI-42.    A 19-year-old normal nonsmoking female has a
moderately severe pulmonary embolism while on oralcontraceptive pills. Which of the following is the mostlikely predisposing factor?
A. Abnormal factor V
B. Abnormal protein CC. Diminished protein C levelD. Diminished protein S levelE. Diminished antithrombin III level
VI-43.    A 22-year-old man has cystic ﬁbrosis. He currently
is hospitalized about three times yearly for infectious ex-acerbations. He is colonized with Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa  and Staphylococcus aureus , but has never had
Burkholderia cepacia  complex. He remains active and is in
college studying architecture. He requires 2 L of oxygenwith exertion. The most recent pulmonary function testsdemonstrate an FEV
1 that is 28% of the predicted value
and an FEV 1/FVC ratio of 44%. Measurement of his arte-
rial blood gas on room air is pH 7.38, Pa CO2 46 mmHg,
and Pa O2 62 mmHg. Which of these characteristics is an
indication for referral for lung transplantation?
A. Colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa
B. FEV 1 <30% predicted
C. FEV 1/FVC ratio <50%
D. Pa CO2 >40 mmHg
E. Use of oxygen with exertion
VI-44.   A 42-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room with acute onset of shortness of breath. She re-
cently had been to visit her parents out of state and rodein a car for about 9 h each way. Two days ago, she devel-oped a mild calf pain and swelling, but she thought thatthis was not unusual after having been sitting with herlegs dependent for the recent trip. On arrival to the emer-gency room, she is noted to be tachypneic. The vital signsare: blood pressure 98/60 mmHg, heart rate 114 beats/min, respiratory rate 28 breaths/min, Sa
O2 92% on room
air, weight 89 kg. The lungs are clear bilaterally. There isCentral Venous 
PressureCardiac 
OutputSystemic Vascular 
Resistance
A ↓↓ ↓
B ↓↑ ↓
C ↑↑ ↓
D ↑↓ ↑
E ↓↓ ↑VI-41. (Continued) VI-37. (Continued)
244 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
pain in the right calf with dorsiﬂexion of the foot, and the
right leg is more swollen when compared to the left. Anarterial blood gas measurement shows a pH of 7.22, Pa
CO2
18 mmHg, and Pa O2 68 mmHg. Kidney and liver function
are normal. A helical CT scan is performed using shield-ing of the uterus and conﬁrms a pulmonary embolus. Allof the following agents can be used alone as initial ther-apy in this patient except
A. enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg SC twice dailyB. fondaparinux, 7.5 mg SC once dailyC. tinzaparin, 175 units/kg SC once dailyD. unfractionated heparin IV adjusted to maintain ac-
tivated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) two tothree times the upper limit of normal
E. warfarin, 7.5 mg PO once daily to maintain INR at
2–3
VI-45.   Which of the following contacts with a patient infected
with tuberculosis is most likely to develop the disease?
A. The child of a parent with smear-negative, culture-
positive pulmonary tuberculosis
B. The co-worker in a small ofﬁce of a patient with la-
ryngeal tuberculosis
C. The HIV-negative partner of an HIV-infected pa-
tient with pulmonary tuberculosis
D. The parent of a young child in diapers with renal tu-
berculosis
E. The spouse of a patient with miliary tuberculosis
VI-46.   A 32-year-old male is brought to the emergency de-
partment after developing sudden-onset shortness of
breath and chest pain while coughing. He reports a 3-month history of increasing dyspnea on exertion, non-productive cough, and anorexia with 15 lb of weight loss.He has no past medical history and takes no medications.The patient smokes one or two packs of cigarettes a day,uses alcohol socially, and has no risk factors for HIV in-fection. A chest radiogram shows a right 80% pneumo-thorax, and there are nodular inﬁltrates in the left basethat spare the costophrenic angle. After placement of achest tube, a chest CT shows bilateral small nodular opac-ities in the lung bases and multiple small cystic spaces inthe lung apex. Which of the following interventions ismost likely to improve the symptoms and radiograms?
A. Intravenous α
1 antitrypsin
B. Isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide
C. Prednisone and cyclophosphamideD. Smoking cessationE. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
VI-47.   A 68-year-old man presents for evaluation of dysp-
nea on exertion. He states that he ﬁrst noticed the symp-toms about 3 years ago. At that time, he had to stopwalking the golf course and began to use a cart, but hewas still able to complete a full 18 holes. Over the pastyear, he has stopped golﬁng altogether because of breath-lessness and states that he has difﬁculty walking to andfrom his mailbox, which is about 50 yards (46 m) fromhis house. He also has a dry cough that occurs on mostdays. It is not worse at night, and he can identify no trig-gers. He denies wheezing. He has had no fevers, chills, orweight loss. He denies any joint symptoms. He is a formersmoker of about 50 pack-years, but quit 8 years previ-ously after being diagnosed with coronary artery disease.In addition to coronary artery disease, he also has benignprostatic hypertrophy for which he takes tamsulosin. Hisother medications include aspirin, atenolol, and simvas-tatin. On physical examination, he appears breathless af-ter walking down the hallway to the examination room,but quickly recovers upon resting. Vital signs are: bloodpressure 118/67 mmHg, heart rate 88 beats/min, respira-tory rate 20 breaths/min, Sa
O2 94% at rest, decreasing to
86% after ambulating 300 ft (91 m). His lung examina-tion shows normal percussion and expansion. There areVelcro-like crackles at both bases, and they are distributedhalfway through both lung ﬁelds. No wheezing wasnoted. Cardiovascular examination is normal. Digitalclubbing is present. A chest CT is performed and isshown below. He is referred for surgical lung biopsy.Which statement below is most typical of the pathologyseen in this disease?
A. Dense amorphous ﬂuid within the alveoli diffusely
that stains positive with periodic acid–Schiff stain
B. Destruction of alveoli with resultant emphysema-
tous areas, predominantly in the upper lobes
C. Diffuse alveolar damage
D. Formation of noncaseating granulomasE. Heterogeneous collagen deposition with ﬁbroblast
foci and honeycombing
VI-48.   A 68-year-old woman has been receiving mechani-
cal ventilation for 10 days for community-acquired pneu-FIGURE VI-47
VI-47. (Continued) VI-44. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 245
monia. Y ou are attempting to decide whether the patient
is appropriate for a spontaneous breathing trial. Which ofthe following factors would indicate that the patient isnot likely to be successfully extubated?
A. Alert mental status
B. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH
2O
C. pH >7.35D. Rapid shallow breathing index (respiratory rate/
tidal volume) >105
E. Sa
O2 >90% on F IO2 <0.5
VI-49.   A 34-year-old man presents for evaluation of a
cough that has been persistent for the past 3 months. Herecalls having an upper respiratory tract infection priorto the onset of cough with complaints of rhinitis, sorethroat, and low-grade fever. After these symptoms re-solved, he states that “the cold moved to my chest” about10 days later. He reports severe coughing episodes thathave been associated with posttussive emesis in the past,but these are less frequent now. His biggest complaint hasbeen coughing that awakens him from sleep at night andultimately has resulted in progressive fatigue. He denieswheezing. Speciﬁc triggers for his cough include eatingcold foods, especially ice cream. He has no history ofasthma or prior history of prolonged cough. He deniessymptoms of gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. He breatheseasily through his nose and does not have seasonal rhi-nitis. He has no past medical history. He works as an ac-countant in a new ofﬁce building. He does not have anyfume exposure. He does not smoke or drink alcohol. Hehas no pets. He does not recall his vaccination history,but thinks he has not had any vaccinations since gradu-ating from high school. On physical examination, he ap-pears well. He is speaking in full sentences. He is 190 cmtall and weighs 95.5 kg. His temperature is 37.5°C, res-piratory rate of 14 breaths/min, heart rate of 64 beats/min, and blood pressure of 112/72 mmHg. His oxygensaturation is 97% on room air at rest. Head, eyes, ears,nose, and throat examination reveals no enlargement ofthe nasal turbinates, with open nasal passages. The air-way is Mallampati class I without cobblestoning or ery-thema. The lung examination is clear to auscultation.No forced expiratory wheezes are present. The cardiac,gastrointestinal, extremity, and neurologic examina-tions are normal. His peak expiratory ﬂow rate is 650 L/min. The forced expiratory volume in one second(FEV
1) is 4.86 L (96% predicted) and forced vital capac-
ity (FVC) is 6.26 (99% predicted). The FEV 1/FVC ratio
is 78%. Which test is most likely to establish the diagno-sis correctly?
A. 24-h pH probe
B. Bordetella pertussis  IgG and IgA levels
C. Methacholine challenge testingD. Peak expiratory ﬂow monitoring in the workplaceE. Skin testing for allergensVI-50.   A 45-year-old male is evaluated in the clinic for as-
thma. His symptoms began 2 years ago and are character-ized by an episodic cough and wheezing that respondedinitially to inhaled bronchodilators and inhaled cortico-steroids but now require nearly constant prednisonetapers. He notes that the symptoms are worst on week-days but cannot pinpoint speciﬁc triggers. His medica-tions are an albuterol MDI, a ﬂuticasone MDI, andprednisone 10 mg PO daily. The patient has no habits andworks as a textile worker. Physical examination is notablefor mild diffuse polyphonic expiratory wheezing but noother abnormality. Which of the following is the most ap-propriate next step?
A. Exercise physiology testing
B. Measurement of FEV
1 before and after work
C. Methacholine challenge testingD. Skin testing for allergiesE. Sputum culture for Aspergillus fumigatus
VI-51.   A 46-year-old man is brought to your ofﬁce by his
wife. He is reluctant to admit that he has any health prob-lems. His wife, on the other hand, is adamant that some-thing be done about his sleepiness. He admits that he isfrequently sleepy at work and falls asleep while watchingtelevision at night, but he attributes this to stress on thejob. She describes loud snoring at night that begins almostimmediately when he falls asleep, punctuated by long peri-ods of no breathing at all. She believes that neither of themis getting enough sleep. On examination, he is a pleasant,obese man in no distress. He is 178 cm tall and weighs 111kg. Blood pressure is elevated at 146/92 mmHg. He has anormal oropharynx and has a short, squat neck. His lungsounds are clear, and he has a protuberant, obese abdo-men. Pulses are intact. After completing the physical ex-amination, the patient’s wife demands to know what iswrong and what you are going to do about it. What are thenext steps in diagnosis and treatment?
A. He and his wife should be reassured that his symp-
toms will improve as his work stress lessens.
B. He meets clinical criteria for obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) and should be referred for surgery.
C. He should be prescribed a therapeutic trial of
modaﬁnil.
D. He should be started on low-dose continuous-posi-
tive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation at home.
E. He should undergo a polysomnogram, potentially
followed by a CPAP trial.
VI-52.   A 34-year-old female seeks evaluation for a com-
plaint of cough and dyspnea on exertion that has gradu-
ally worsened over 3 months. The patient has no pasthistory of pulmonary complaints and has never had as-thma. She started working in a pet store approximately 6months ago. Her duties there include cleaning the reptileand bird cages. She reports occasional low-grade feversbut has had no wheezing. The cough is dry and nonpro-VI-48. (Continued)
246 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
ductive. Before 3 months ago the patient had no limita-
tion of exercise tolerance, but now she reports that shegets dyspneic climbing two ﬂights of stairs. On physicalexamination the patient appears well. She has an oxygensaturation of 95% on room air at rest but desaturates to91% with ambulation. T emperature is 37.7°C (99.8°F).The pulmonary examination is unremarkable. No club-bing or cyanosis is present. The patient has a normalchest radiogram. A high-resolution chest CT shows dif-fuse ground-glass inﬁltrates in the lower lobes with thepresence of centrilobular nodules. A transbronchial bi-opsy shows an interstitial alveolar inﬁltrate of plasmacells, lymphocytes, and occasional eosinophils. There arealso several loose noncaseating granulomas. All culturesare negative for bacterial, viral, and fungal pathogens.What is the diagnosis?
A. Sarcoidosis
B. PsittacosisC. Hypersensitivity pneumonitisD. Nonspeciﬁc interstitial pneumonitis related to col-
lagen vascular disease
E. Aspergillosis
VI-53.   What treatment do you recommend?
A. GlucocorticoidsB. DoxycyclineC. Glucocorticoids plus azathioprineD. Glucocorticoids plus removal of antigenE. Amphotericin
VI-54.   A 71-year-old man presents with complaints of
cough and sputum production. He describes coughing upa small amount of blood occasionally. He states that hissymptoms have worsened over a period of years, and henow gets winded going up one ﬂight of stairs. He has adistant history of treated tuberculosis and has beentreated for community-acquired pneumonia two-to-three times per year for the past several years. He receiveda ﬂu vaccination this fall. He has never smoked. On ex-amination, his respirations are 16/min and regular. Hehas scattered rhonchi and faint expiratory wheezes bilat-erally on auscultation. He is not using accessory musclesto breathe. Y ou suspect that this patient may have bron-chiectasis to explain his recurrent infections. Which ofthe following is true regarding making this diagnosis?
A. Bronchiectasis cannot be diagnosed in the setting of
an acute pulmonary infection.
B. Bronchoscopy is required to deﬁnitively diagnose
bronchiectasis.
C. Chest x-ray demonstrating honeycombing pattern
will make the diagnosis.
D. High-resolution chest CT scan is the preferred con-
ﬁrmatory test for bronchiectasis.
E. Physical examination is sufﬁcient to diagnose bron-
chiectasis in a patient with this history.VI-55.   All the following are pulmonary manifestations of
systemic lupus erythematosus except
A. pleuritis
B. progressive pulmonary ﬁbrosisC. pulmonary hemorrhageD. diaphragmatic dysfunction with loss of lung volumesE. pulmonary vascular disease
VI-56.   Which of the following is the most appropriate ther-
apy for a 60-year-old male with 2 weeks of productivecough, fever, shortness of breath, and the chest radiogramas shown in the following ﬁgure?
A. Cephalexin
B. CiproﬂoxacinC. ClindamycinD. PenicillinE. Vancomycin
VI-57.    A 68-year-old man presents to the emergency room
with fever and productive cough. His illness began abruptly4 days ago. He describes his cough as productive of a rusty-colored sputum. There is associated left-sided pleuritic chestpain. He is a smoker with a 48 pack-year history. On physicalexamination, there is dullness to percussion over the lowerone-third of the left chest. There is decreased tactile fremitusand distant breath sounds. A chest radiograph shows denseconsolidation of the left lower lobe and an associated effu-sion. Which of the following factors would be an indicationfor tube thoracostomy for treatment of the pleural effusion?
A. Loculated pleural ﬂuid
B. Pleural ﬂuid pH <7.20C. Pleural ﬂuid glucose <60 mg/dLD. Positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural ﬂuidE. All of the above
FIGURE VI-56
VI-52. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 247
VI-58.   In the ﬁrst year following lung transplant, which of
the following is the most common cause of mortality?
A. Acute rejection
B. Bronchiolitis obliteransC. InfectionD. Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorderE. Primary graft failure
VI-59.   A 52-year-old alcoholic man presents to a local
emergency room with purulent, productive cough, short-ness of breath, right-sided chest pain, and fever. Hethinks his symptoms started a few days ago. On examina-tion, he has a temperature of 38.8°C, heart rate of 96beats/min, respirations of 22 breaths/min, oxygen satura-tion of 85% on room air, and a blood pressure of 115/92mmHg. He has poor dentition and fetid breath. There isdullness to percussion over the right lower lung ﬁeld, andrales are auscultated bilaterally. A chest radiograph showsa right-sided opacity in the superior portion of the rightlower lobe with an air-ﬂuid level present. There appearsto be right-sided parenchymal consolidation as well.Which of the following is the most likely etiologic organ-ism based on this presentation?
A. Candida glabrata
B. Inﬂuenza virus
C. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
D. Peptostreptococcus
E. Streptococcus pneumoniae
VI-60.   A 45-year-old woman presents for evaluation of ab-
normal sensations in her legs that keep her from sleepingat night. She ﬁrst notices the symptoms around 8 
P.M.
when she is sitting quietly watching television. She de-scribes the symptoms as “ants crawling in her veins.”While the symptoms are not painful, they are very un-comfortable and worsen when she lies down at night.They interfere with her ability to fall asleep about fourtimes weekly. If she gets out of bed to walk or rubs herlegs, the symptoms disappear almost immediately only torecur as soon as she is still. She also sometimes takes avery hot bath to alleviate the symptoms. During sleep,her husband complains that she kicks him throughoutthe night. She has no history of neurologic or renal dis-ease. She currently is perimenopausal and has been expe-riencing very heavy and prolonged menstrual cycles overthe past several months. The physical examination, in-cluding thorough neurologic examination, is normal.Her hemoglobin is 9.8 g/dL and hematocrit is 30.1%. Themean corpuscular volume is 68 fL. Serum ferritin is 22ng/mL. Which is the most appropriate initial therapy forthis patient?
A. Carbidopa/levodopa
B. Hormone replacement therapyC. Iron supplementationD. OxycodoneE. PramipexoleVI-61.   A 45-year-old female is seen in the clinic for evalua-
tion of a chronic cough. She reports a cough that began inher early twenties that is occasionally productive of yel-low or green thick sputum. She has been treated withinnumerable courses of antibiotics, all with brief im-provements in the symptoms. The patient has been toldthat she has asthma, and her only medications are ﬂutica-sone and albuterol metered-dose inhalers (MDIs). Physi-cal examination is notable for normal vital signs and anoxygen saturation of 92% on room air. The patient’slungs have dullness in the upper lobes bilaterally and dif-fuse expiratory wheezing. She has mild digital clubbing.The remainder of the physical examination is normal.Pulmonary function testing shows airﬂow obstruction.Review of the sputum culture data shows that she has hadmultiple positive cultures for Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Staphylococcus aureus . Posteroanterior (PA) and lat-
eral chest radiography shows bilateral upper lobe inﬁl-trates. Which of the following tests is the most importantﬁrst step in diagnosing the underlying disease?
A. Chest computed tomogram (CT)
B. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsyC. Sweat chloride testingD. Blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for ∆F508
mutation
E. Sputum cytology
VI-62.   A 23-year-old hospital worker is evaluated for a
known contact with a patient with active tuberculosis.One year ago his intermediate-strength PPD had 3 mm ofinduration; now it has 13 mm of induration at 48 h. Hehas no signiﬁcant past medical history and is on no med-ications. Subsequent management should include
A. chest radiography
B. isoniazid 300 mg/d for 3 monthsC. measurement of baseline liver function testsD. measurement of liver function tests every 3 monthsE. repeated intermediate-strength PPD testing in 2 weeks
VI-63.   A 72-year-old male with a long history of tobacco
use is seen in the clinic for 3 weeks of progressive dyspneaon exertion. He has had a mild nonproductive cough andanorexia but denies fevers, chills, or sweats. On physicalexamination, he has normal vital signs and normal oxy-gen saturation on room air. Jugular venous pressure isnormal, and cardiac examination shows decreased heartsounds but no other abnormality. The trachea is midline,and there is no associated lymphadenopathy. On pulmo-nary examination, the patient has dullness over the leftlower lung ﬁeld, decreased tactile fremitus, decreasedbreath sounds, and no voice transmission. The right lungexamination is normal. After obtaining chest plain ﬁlm,appropriate initial management at this point would in-clude which of the following?
A. Intravenous antibiotics
B. Thoracentesis
248 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
C. Bronchoscopy
D. Deep suctioningE. Bronchodilator therapy
VI-64.   Which of the following is speciﬁc in differentiating
bacterial from viral acute sinusitis?
A. Duration of illness >7 days
B. Mucosal thickening on CT scanC. Nasal cultureD. Purulent nasal dischargeE. All of the aboveF. None of the above
VI-65.   Which of the following is the most common under-
lying medical condition of patients undergoing lungtransplantation?
A. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
B. Cystic ﬁbrosisC. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF)D. Pulmonary hypertensionE. Sarcoidosis
VI-66.   A 34-year-old woman complains of cough produc-
tive of green sputum, malaise, and headache over the pastweek. She notes that two of her children recently hadcolds, and she thought she caught this from one of them.She smokes two packs of cigarettes a day. On examina-tion, she is afebrile, with a heart rate of 125 beats/min andrespiratory rate of 32 breaths/min. Oxygen saturation is94% on room air. She has pronounced use of her acces-sory respiratory musculature. Physical examination re-veals diffuse expiratory wheezing on auscultation of thelungs. There are no areas of bronchophony or egophony.In the proper clinical context, which of the following isnecessary to diagnose community-acquired pneumonia?
A. Abnormal white blood cell (WBC) count
B. Bronchial breath soundsC. Elevated measures of inﬂammation (erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein)
D. Inﬁltrate on chest radiographE. Supportive microbiologic data
VI-67.   In a patient with severe bullous emphysema, the
most appropriate method for measuring lung volumes is
A. body plethysmography
B. diffusing capacity of carbon monoxideC. spirometryD. helium dilutionE. transdiaphragmatic pressure
VI-68.   A 50-year-old female receives an uncomplicated double
lung transplant for a history of primary pulmonary hyper-tension. She was cytomegalovirus (CMV)-seropositive andreceived CMV prophylaxis immediately after the transplant.On postoperative day 7 she developed fever and a new inﬁl-trate in the right lung. Which of the following organisms ismost likely to be the causative agent of these ﬁndings?
A. Cytomegalovirus
B. Listeria monocytogenes
C. Nocardia asteroides
D. Pneumocystis carinii
E. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
VI-69.   A 20-year-old man presents for evaluation of exces-
sive daytime somnolence. He is ﬁnding it increasingly dif-ﬁcult to stay awake during his classes. Recently, his gradeshave fallen because whenever he tries to read he ﬁndshimself drifting off. He ﬁnds that his alertness is best afterexercising or brief naps of 10–30 min. Because of this, hestates that he takes 5 or 10 “catnaps” daily. The sleepinesspersists despite averaging 9 h of sleep nightly. His Ep-worth Sleepiness Scale score is 21/24. In addition to ex-cessive somnolence, he reports occasional hallucinationsthat occur as he is falling asleep. He describes these occur-rences as a voice calling his name as he drifts off. Perhapsonce weekly, he awakens from sleep but is unable to movefor a period of about 30 s. He has never had apparent lossof consciousness but states that whenever he is laughing,he feels a heaviness in his neck and arms. Once he had tolean against a wall to keep from falling down. He under-goes an overnight sleep study and multiple sleep latencytest. There is no sleep apnea. His mean sleep latency onﬁve naps is 2.3 min. In three of the ﬁve naps, rapid-eye-movement sleep is present. Which of the following ﬁnd-ings of this patient is most speciﬁc for the diagnosis ofnarcolepsy?
A. Cataplexy
B. Excessive daytime somnolenceC. Hypnagogic hallucinationsD. Rapid-eye-movement sleep in more than two naps
on a multiple sleep latency test
E. Sleep paralysis
VI-70.   Which of the following is the most common sleep
disorder in the population?
A. Delayed sleep phase syndrome
B. InsomniaC. Obstructive sleep apneaD. NarcolepsyE. Restless legs syndrome
VI-71.   Patients with chronic hypoventilation disorders of-
ten complain of a headache upon wakening. What is thecause of this symptom?
A. Arousals from sleep
B. Cerebral vasodilationC. Cerebral vasoconstrictionD. PolycythemiaE. Nocturnal microaspiration and coughVI-68. (Continued) VI-63. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 249
VI-72.   From which stage of sleep are the parasomnias som-
nambulism and night terrors most likely to occur?
A. Stage 1
B. Stage 2C. Stage 3/4 (Slow-wave sleep)D. Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep
VI-73.   Secondhand tobacco smoke has been associated
with which of the following?
A. Increased risk of lung cancer
B. Increased prevalence of respiratory illnessC. Excess cardiac mortalityD. A and BE. All of A, B, and C
VI-74.   All of the following are factors that are related to the
increased incidence of sepsis in the United States except
A. aging of the populationB. increased longevity of individuals with chronic diseaseC. increased risk of sepsis in individuals without co-
morbidities
D. increased risk of sepsis in individuals with AIDSE. increased use of immunosuppressive drugs
VI-75.   A 28-year-old man comes to the emergency depart-
ment with complaints of 1–2 days of fever, malaise,cough, green sputum production, and dyspnea. He is acigarette smoker and works in a restaurant. He has no sig-niﬁcant past medical history and takes no medications.He is uncomfortable but alert with temperature of39.2°C, respiratory rate 28 breaths/min, blood pressure110/70 mmHg, heart rate 105 beats/min, Sa
O2 on room
air is 94%. His chemistry studies are normal. White bloodcell (WBC) count is 15,500/ µL. There are bronchial
breath sounds in the right lower lobe, and chest radio-graph shows consolidation in that area. Which of the fol-lowing is the most appropriate antibiotic therapy?
A. Azithromycin
B. Ceftriaxone plus clarithromycinC. FluconazoleD. Piperacillin/tazobactamE. Vancomycin
VI-76.   A 68-year-old woman comes to the emergency de-
partment with complaints of 3 days of fever, malaise,cough with green sputum, dyspnea, and right lower chestpain that is worse on inspiration. She is a 1 pack per daycigarette smoker and works in a retail store. Her onlymedication is hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension. Sheis alert but in mild respiratory distress. Her temperatureis 39.2°C, respiratory rate 32 breaths/min, blood pressure110/70 mmHg, heart rate 105 beats/min, Sa
O2 on room
air is 91%. Her chemistry studies show a serum glucose of140 mg/dL and a BUN of 32 mg/dL. WBC is 12,500/ µL
with a left shift. There are bronchial breath sounds in theright lower lobe, and chest radiograph shows consolida-tion in the right and left lower lobes. Which of the follow-ing is the most appropriate antibiotic therapy?
A. Azithromycin
B. Ceftriaxone plus clarithromycinC. FluconazoleD. Piperacillin/tazobactamE. Vancomycin
VI-77.   A 45-year-old woman with HIV is admitted to the
intensive care unit with pneumonia secondary to Pneu-
mocystis jiroveci . She requires mechanical ventilatory sup-
port. The ventilator settings are: PC mode, inspiratorypressure 30 cmH
2O, F IO2 1.0, and PEEP 10 cmH 2O. An
arterial blood gas measured on these settings shows: pH7.32, Pa
CO2 46 mmHg, and Pa O2 62 mmHg. All of the fol-
lowing are important supportive measures for this pa-tient except
A. frequent ventilator circuit changesB. gastric acid suppressionC. nutritional supportD. prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosisE. sedation and analgesia to maintain patient comfort
VI-78.   A 68-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
room for fever and lethargy. She ﬁrst felt ill yesterday andexperienced generalized body aches. Overnight, she de-veloped a fever to 39.6°C and had shaking chills. By thismorning, she was feeling very fatigued. Her son feels thatshe has had periods of waxing and waning mental status.She denies cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdom-inal pain. She has a past medical history of rheumatoidarthritis. She takes prednisone, 5 mg daily, and metho-trexate, 15 mg weekly. On examination, she is lethargicbut appropriate. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 85/50mmHg, heart rate 122 beats/min, temperature 39.1°C,respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, Sa
O2 97% on room air.
Physical examination shows clear lung ﬁelds and a regulartachycardia without murmur. There is no abdominal ten-derness or masses. Stool is negative for occult blood.There are no rashes. Hematologic studies show a whiteblood cell count of 24,200/ µL with a differential of 82%
PMNs, 8% band forms, 6% lymphocytes, 3% monocytes.Hemoglobin is 8.2 g/dL. A urinalysis has numerous whiteblood cells with gram-negative bacteria on Gram stain.Chemistries reveal the following: bicarbonate 16 meq/L,BUN 60 mg/dL, and creatinine 2.4 mg/dL. After ﬂuid ad-ministration of 2 L, the patient has a blood pressure of88/54 mmHg and a heart rate of 112 beats/min with acentral venous pressure of 18 cmH
2O. There is 25 mL of
urine output in the ﬁrst hour. The patient has been initi-ated on antibiotics with ciproﬂoxacin. What should bedone next for the treatment of this patient’s hypotension?
A. Dopamine, 3 µg/kg per minute IV
B. Hydrocortisone, 50 mg IV every 6 h
C. Norepinephrine, 2 µg/min IVVI-76. (Continued)
250 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
D. Ongoing colloid administration at 500–1000 mL/h
E. Transfusion of 2 units packed red blood cells
VI-79.   All of the following statements about the epidemiology
and pathogenesis of sepsis and septic shock are true except
A. Blood cultures are positive in only 20–40% of cases
of severe sepsis.
B. Microbial invasion of the bloodstream is not neces-
sary for the development of severe sepsis.
C. The hallmark of septic shock is a marked decrease in
peripheral vascular resistance that occurs despite in-creased plasma levels of catecholamines.
D. The incidence and mortality from septic shock have
declined over the past 20 years.
E. Widespread vascular endothelial injury is present in se-
vere sepsis and is mediated by cytokines and procoagu-lant factors that stimulate intravascular thrombosis.
VI-80.   All of the following statements about the physiology
of mechanical ventilation are true except
A. Application of positive end-expiratory pressure de-
creases preload and afterload.
B. High inspired tidal volumes contribute to the devel-
opment of acute lung injury due to overdistentionof alveoli with resultant alveolar damage.
C. Increasing the inspiratory ﬂow rate will increase the
ratio of inspiration to expiration (I:E) and allowmore time for expiration.
D. Mechanical ventilation provides assistance with in-
spiration and expiration.
E. Positive end-expiratory pressure helps prevent alve-
olar collapse at end-expiration.
VI-81.   A 64-year-old man requires endotracheal intubation
and mechanical ventilation for chronic obstructive pulmo-nary disease. He was paralyzed with rocuronium for intu-bation. His initial ventilator settings were AC mode,respiratory rate 10 breaths/min, F
IO2 1.0, V t (tidal volume)
550 mL, and PEEP 0 cmH 2O. On admission to the inten-
sive care unit, the patient remains paralyzed; arterial bloodgas is pH 7.22, Pa
CO2 78 mmHg, and Pa O2 394 mmHg. The
FIO2 is decreased to 0.6. Thirty minutes later, you are called
to the bedside to evaluate the patient for hypotension. Cur-rent vital signs are: blood pressure 80/40 mmHg, heart rate133 beats/min, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, and Sa
O2
92%. Physical examination shows prolonged expirationwith wheezing continuing until the initiation of the nextbreath. Breath sounds are heard in both lung ﬁelds. Thehigh-pressure alarm on the ventilator is triggering. Whatshould be done ﬁrst in treating this patient’s hypotension?
A. Administer a ﬂuid bolus of 500 mL
B. Disconnect the patient from the ventilatorC. Initiate a continuous IV infusion of midazolamD. Initiate a continuous IV infusion of norepinephrineE. Perform tube thoracostomy on the right sideVI-82.   A 32-year-old man with a medical history of morbid
obesity, active tobacco use, and hypertension is referredfor a sleep study by his primary physician. The patient de-scribes falling asleep at work almost every afternoon andis frequently drowsy when driving his car. His girlfriendnotes that he snores heavily throughout the night, andseems to have intermittent episodes when he is notbreathing at all. He undergoes the study, which reveals sixto seven hypopneic events and two to three apneic eventseach hour. Which of the following is true regarding ob-structive sleep apnea (OSA)?
A. 85% of patients with OSA have a body mass index
(BMI) >30 kg/m
2
B. Irregular breathing during sleep without daytime
sleepiness qualiﬁes as OSA
C. The male to female ratio is roughly equal in OSA
D. This patient does not meet criteria for OSA based
on having too few apneic events per hour
E. This patient should be screened for diabetes mellitus
VI-83.   In the intensive care unit, you are caring for a 36-year-
old man with a cocaine overdose. He has pyrexia, tachycar-dia, and hypertensive urgency. He begins to have briefepisodes of ventricular tachycardia but is awake but disori-ented. Over the next hour, his ventricular tachycardia be-comes more frequent and lasts longer each time. What isthe appropriate management strategy for his arrhythmia?
A. Intravenous diazepam
B. Intravenous hydralazineC. Intravenous norepinephrineD. Intravenous propranolol
VI-84.   Which of the following interstitial lung diseases is
not associated with smoking?
A. Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis
B. Respiratory bronchiolitis–interstitial lung diseaseC. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosisD. Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumoniaE. Pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis
VI-85.   A 53-year-old male is seen in the emergency depart-
ment with sudden-onset fever, chills, malaise, and short-ness of breath but no wheezing. He has no signiﬁcant pastmedical history and is a farmer. Of note, he worked earlierin the day stacking hay. PA and lateral chest radiographyshow bilateral upper lobe inﬁltrates. Which organism ismost likely to be responsible for this presentation?
A. Nocardia asteroides
B. Histoplasma capsulatum
C. Cryptococcus neoformans
D. Actinomyces
E. Aspergillus fumigatus
VI-86.   A 56-year-old woman presents for evaluation of dysp-
nea and cough for 2 months. During this time, she has also
had intermittent fevers, malaise, and a 5.5 kg (12 lb) weightVI-78. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 251
loss. She denies having any ill contacts and has not recently
traveled. She works as a nurse, and a yearly PPD test per-formed 3 months ago was negative. She denies any exposureto organic dusts and does not have any birds as pets. She hasa history of rheumatoid arthritis and is currently taking hy-droxychloroquine, 200 mg twice daily. There has been noworsening in her joint symptoms. On physical examina-tion, diffuse inspiratory crackles and squeaks are heard. ACT scan of the chest reveals patchy alveolar inﬁltrates andbronchial wall thickening. Pulmonary function testing re-veals mild restriction. She undergoes a surgical lung biopsy.The pathology shows granulation tissue ﬁlling the small air-ways, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. The alveolar interstitiumhas chronic inﬂammation and organizing pneumonia.What is the most appropriate therapy for this patient?
A. Azathioprine, 100 mg daily
B. Discontinue hydroxychloroquine and observeC. Inﬂiximab IV once monthlyD. Methotrexate, 15 mg weeklyE. Prednisone, 1.5 mg/kg daily
VI-87.   Y ou are evaluating a patient with a chronic respira-
tory acidosis. Which of the following tests will be helpfulin distinguishing a central nervous system cause ofchronic hypoventilation from a pulmonary airway or pul-monary parenchymal cause?
A. Alveolar-arterial (
A – a) oxygen gradient 
B. Diaphragmatic EMG 
C. Maximal expiratory pressure D. Pa
CO2
E. Pa O2
VI-88.   A 72-year-old female with severe osteoporosis pre-
sents for evaluation of shortness of breath. She is a life-time nonsmoker and has had no exposures. On physicalexamination you note marked kyphoscoliosis. All the fol-lowing pulmonary abnormalities are expected except
A. restrictive lung diseaseB. alveolar hypoventilationC. obstructive lung diseaseD. ventilation-perfusion abnormalities with hypox-
emia
E. pulmonary hypertension
VI-89.   A 39-year-old man comes to the emergency depart-
ment for a persistent cough. He has had high fevers,chills, and a cough for 2 weeks. He was well until 2 weeksago. He is visiting family locally and resides in T ennessee.Initially, the cough was nonproductive but has becomeproductive as the rest of his symptoms have worsened. Hecomplains of pleuritic chest pain and arthralgias. Heworks as a ranger in a wooded state park. On physical ex-amination, he is thin but well nourished. He has no skinlesions. Chest auscultation reveals crackles throughoutboth lung ﬁelds. A chest radiograph shows alveolar inﬁl-trates bilaterally with a cavity in the left middle lobe with-out adenopathy. His white blood cell count is 15,000/ µL,
hemoglobin is 12 g/dL, and platelets are 248,000/ µL. So-
dium is 136 meq/L, potassium 3.8 meq/L, bicarbonate 24meq/L, and renal function is normal. Which diagnostictest is most likely to reveal the cause of this patient’s pul-monary syndrome?
A. Acid-fast bacilli smear of the sputum 
B. Bone marrow aspirate and cultureC. Sputum KOH stainD. Sputum Quellung reactionE. Urinary Legionella  antigen
VI-90.   A 45-year-old female with known rheumatoid ar-
thritis complains of a 1-week history of dyspnea onexertion and dry cough. She had been taking hydroxy-chloroquine and prednisone 7.5 mg until 3 months ago,when low-dose weekly methotrexate was added becauseof active synovitis. The patient’s temperature is 37.8°C(100°F), and her room air oxygen saturation falls from95% to 87% with ambulation. Chest-x-ray shows new bi-lateral alveolar inﬁltrates.
Pulmonary function tests reveal the following:
FEV
1, 3.1 L (70% of predicted)
TLC, 5.3 L (60% of predicted)
FVC, 3.9 L (68% of predicted)VC, 3.9 L (58% of predicted)FEV
1/FVC, 79%
Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO), 62%
of predicted
She had a normal pulmonary function test (PFT) 1 yearago. All but which of the following would be an appropri-ate next step?
A. Start broad-spectrum antibiotics.
B. Increase the methotrexate dose.C. Perform bronchoalveolar lavage with transbronchial
lavage.
D. Increase prednisone to 60 mg/d.E. Discontinue methotrexate.
VI-91.   All of the following are relative contraindications for
the use of succinylcholine as a paralytic for endotrachealintubation except
A. acetaminophen overdoseB. acute renal failureC. crush injuriesD. muscular dystrophyE. tumor lysis syndrome
VI-92.   A 32-year-old female presents with subjective com-
plaints of paresthesias and weakness. She reports that shewas well until 4 weeks ago, when she had a self-limited diar-rheal illness that lasted 4 days. For the last week she hasVI-89. (Continued) VI-86. (Continued)
252 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
noted tingling in the ﬁngers and toes. More recently she feels
as if she is developing weakness to the extent where she hasdifﬁculty walking because she is unable to lift her toes. Addi-tionally, she feels that she has lost signiﬁcant grip strength.Y ou suspect Guillain-Barré syndrome after a Campylobacter
infection, and the patient is hospitalized and started on in-travenous immunoglobulin. After the hospitalization, thepatient’s symptoms worsen so that she now is unable to lifther legs against gravity and is complaining of shortness ofbreath with a decreased voice. Which of the following is anindication for the initiation of mechanical ventilation in thispatient with suspected diaphragmatic weakness?
A. Vital capacity below 20 mL/kg
B. Elevated Pa
CO2
C. Maximum inspiratory pressure less than 30 cmH 2O
D. Maximum expiratory pressure less than 40 cmH 2O
E. All of the above
VI-93.   A 38-year-old African-American woman is referred
to the clinic for evaluation of an abnormal chest radio-graph. She had been brought to the hospital after a motorvehicle accident and had a chest radiograph performed toevaluate for rib fracture. On radiography, she was foundto have bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. She has since re-covered from her accident with no further chest pain. Sheotherwise states that she is in good health. She has had noshortness of breath, cough, or wheezing. She has neverhad prior lung disease. She denies recent acute illness, fe-vers, chills, night sweats, or weight loss. She has a historyof hypertension and takes lisinopril. She lives in West Vir-ginia. She does not smoke cigarettes. On physical exami-nation, she appears well and in no distress. An oxygensaturation on room air is 97%. A thorough physical ex-amination is normal. A CT of the chest is recommendedand demonstrates bilateral enlargement of hilar lymphnodes and right paratracheal lymph node measuring upto 1.5 cm in size. The lung parenchyma is normal. Pul-monary function tests show a total lung capacity of 4.8 L(96% predicted) and a diffusion capacity of carbon mon-oxide of 13.4 (88% predicted). Spirometry is normalwithout obstruction. Bronchoscopy with transbronchialbiopsies and transbronchial needle aspiration shows non-caseating granulomas. No fungal elements or acid-fastbacilli are seen, but cultures are pending. What is the bestapproach to therapy for this patient?
A. Isoniazid, pyrazinamide, rifampin, and ethambutol
B. ItraconazoleC. Prednisone 20 mg dailyD. Prednisone 1 mg/kg dailyE. Reassurance and close follow-up
VI-94.   A 28-year-old man is brought to the emergency
room by ambulance after being stung by several yellowjackets while cleaning out an old storage building at hishome. He received four bites on his arms and neck. Im-mediately after being stung, he developed swelling at thesites and a diffuse pruritus. Within 15 min, diffuse urti-caria and wheezing developed. His family called emer-gency services, and upon their arrival the patient wasnoted to be hypotensive (blood pressure 88/42 mmHg)and tachycardic (136 beats/min). There was swelling ofthe tongue with diffuse wheezing. Epinephrine, 0.3 mg,was given IM immediately. During transportation to theemergency room, the patient developed marked respira-tory distress with use of accessory muscles and inspira-tory stridor. Endotracheal intubation and mechanicalventilation were initiated for impending airway obstruc-tion. A second dose of epinephrine, 0.3 mg, was adminis-tered IM. Upon arrival at the emergency department, thepatient is sedated and remains paralyzed following his in-tubation. His current vital signs are: blood pressure 74/40mmHg, heart rate 145 beats/min, respiratory rate 10breaths/min, temperature 37.3°C, and Sa
O2 100%. The
ventilator settings are assist-control mode with a set rateof 10, F
IO2 1.0, tidal volume 500 mL, and positive end-ex-
piratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cmH 2O. There is diffuse ur-
ticaria and ﬂushing of the skin. The lips and tongue areswollen. Diffuse expiratory wheezes are present and endprior to the start of the next inhalation. The cardiovascu-lar examination demonstrates a regular tachycardia with-out murmurs. Bowel sounds are hyperactive. Neurologicexamination is consistent with paralytic administration.Two 16-gauge IVs have been placed in the bilateral an-tecubital fossae. A liter of normal saline (0.9%) has beenadministered during transport to the hospital, and an in-fusion of normal saline is being continued at 1 L/h. Thepatient is receiving inhaled albuterol through the ventila-tor circuit. Which of the following is the best approach toongoing management of this patient that is most likely toimprove his hypotension?
A. Administer diphenhydramine, 50 mg, and raniti-
dine, 50 mg, IV .
B. Administer epinephrine, 0.1–0.3 mg IV .
C. Administer methylprednisolone, 125 mg IV .D. Change the IV ﬂuid solution from normal saline to
lactated Ringer’s solution and increase rate to 2 L/h.
E. Disconnect the patient from the ventilator to allow a
full exhalation.
VI-95.   Which of the following treatments has not been
shown to improve mortality in septic shock?
A. Activated protein C (drotrecogin alpha)
B. Administration of antibiotics within 1 h of presentationC. Bicarbonate therapy for severe acidosisD. Early goal-directed therapyVI-94. (Continued) VI-92. (Continued)
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 253
VI-96.   A 68-year-old male is seen in the clinic for evalua-
tion of chronic cough that has lasted 4 months. He re-
ports that the cough is dry and occurs at any time of theday. He denies hemoptysis or associated constitutionalsymptoms. Further, there is no wheezing, acid reﬂuxsymptoms, or postnasal drip. Past medical history is no-table for a well-compensated ischemic cardiomyopathythat was diagnosed 6 months ago. His current medica-tions include aspirin, carvedilol, furosemide, ramipril,amlodipine, and digoxin. He has no history of tobacco oralcohol abuse and denies occupational exposure. Physicalexamination shows a normal upper airway, clear lungs,and a normal cardiac examination with the exception ofan enlarged point of maximal impulse. Plain radiographyof the chest is normal with the exception of cardiomegaly.Which of the following is the most appropriate next stepin his management?
A. Bronchoscopy
B. Changing furosemide to bumetanideC. Discontinuing digoxinD. Changing ramipril to valsartanE. Giving azithromycin for 5 daysVI-96. (Continued)
254VI. DISORDERS OF THE 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
ANSWERS
VI-1. The answer is C.   (Chap. 35)   In the evaluation of cyanosis, the ﬁrst step is to differenti-
ate central from peripheral cyanosis. In central cyanosis, because the etiology is either re-
duced oxygen saturation or abnormal hemoglobin, the physical ﬁndings include bluishdiscoloration of both mucous membranes and skin. In contrast, peripheral cyanosis is as-sociated with normal oxygen saturation but slowing of blood ﬂow and an increased frac-tion of oxygen extraction from blood; subsequently, the physical ﬁndings are present onlyin the skin and extremities. Mucous membranes are spared. Peripheral cyanosis is com-monly caused by cold exposure with vasoconstriction in the digits. Similar physiology isfound in Raynaud’s phenomenon. Peripheral vascular disease and deep venous thrombo-sis result in slowed blood ﬂow and increased oxygen extraction with subsequent cyanosis.Methemoglobinemia causes abnormal hemoglobin that circulates systemically. Conse-quently, the cyanosis associated with this disorder is systemic. Other common causes ofcentral cyanosis include severe lung disease with hypoxemia, right-to-left intracardiacshunting, and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.
VI-2. The answer is D.   (Chap. 251)   Aspiration can lead to anaerobic infection and chemical
pneumonitis. The etiologic differential diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia(CAP) in a patient with a history of recent travel to the southwestern United Statesshould include Coccidioides .Aspergillus  has a worldwide distribution and is not a cause of
CAP syndrome. Alcohol use predisposes patients to anaerobic infection, likely due to as-piration, as well as S. pneumoniae .Klebsiella  is classically associated with CAP in alcoholic
patients but in reality this is rarely seen. Patients with structural lung disease, such as cys-tic ﬁbrosis or bronchiectasis, are at risk for a unique group of organisms including P.
aeruginosa and S. aureus . Poor dental hygiene is associated with anaerobic infections.
VI-3. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 34, 255, and 312)   A variety of autoimmune diseases may
cause pulmonary/renal disease, including Wegener’s granulomatosis, microscopic poly-angiitis, SLE, and cryoglobulinemia. Goodpasture’s syndrome is characterized by thepresence of anti–glomerular basement antibodies that cause glomerulonephritis withconcurrent diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. The disease typically presents in patients over 40years old with a history of cigarette smoking. These patients usually do not have fevers orjoint symptoms. Among the listed options, antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase areseen in patients with type 1 diabetes or stiff-man syndrome, anti–smooth muscle anti-bodies in patients with autoimmune hepatitis, and anti–U1 RNP in those with mixedconnective tissue disease. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may cause renal diseaseand alveolar hemorrhage, but this usually occurs in the context of a systemic illness withprominent thrombosis in other organ systems [extremities, central nervous system(CNS)].
VI-4. The answer is E.   (Chap. 249)   Multiple drugs have been associated with eosinophilic
pulmonary reactions. They include nitrofurantoin, sulfonamides, NSAIDs, penicillins,thiazides, tricyclic antidepressants, hydralazine, and chlorpropramide, among others.Amiodarone can cause an acute respiratory distress syndrome with the initiation of thedrug as well as a syndrome of pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Eosinophilic pneumonia is not causedby amiodarone.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 255
VI-5. The answer is A.   (Chap. 31)   Streptococcus pyogenes  is the most common cause of bacte-
rial pharyngitis in adults, accounting for ~5–15% of cases of acute pharyngitis (the larg-
est number being viral). Group A Streptococcus is an uncommon cause of pharyngitisafter age 15. Cough and coryza are more suggestive of viral pharyngitis, as is a less severesore throat. Pharyngeal exudates, tender cervical adenopathy, fever, and lack of cough areall more predictive of pharyngitis due to S. pyogenes . Some experts recommend empirical
penicillin treatment without throat sampling for rapid antigen and culture if at leastthree or four of the above clinical criteria are met, while others recommend making a mi-crobiologic diagnosis in all cases where streptococcal infection is being considered. Therapid streptococcal antigen test is indeed rapid but lacks complete sensitivity in a clinicsetting. Sending streptococcal antigen–negative samples for culture that is more sensitivebut takes 2–4 days to return is also controversial.
VI-6. The answer is E.   (Chap. 31)   Nonspeciﬁc upper respiratory tract infections (URIs) are
the leading cause of ambulatory care visits. By deﬁnition, they are characterized by noprominent localizing features, and symptoms include rhinorrhea (with or without puru-lence), nasal congestion, cough, and sore throat. Nearly all nonspeciﬁc URIs are caused
by viral infections including rhinovirus (most common), inﬂuenza, parainﬂuenza, andadenovirus. Purulent secretions in the absence of other clinical features are a poor predic-tor of bacterial infection. Although decongestant medicines, antitussives, and nasal salinehelp temporarily ameliorate the symptoms of URI, no antibiotics, vitamin, or alternativemedicine has consistently been shown in a randomized clinical trial to affect the durationof a cold.
VI-7. The answer is A.   (Chap. 257)   Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is usually sec-
ondary to the rupture of small apical blebs that lie near the pleural surface. The typi-cal patient is a thin young male who smokes. The presenting symptoms are chestpain and dyspnea. The recommended initial approach to treatment is needle aspira-tion of the pneumothorax. If this fails to fully expand the lung, placement of a smallapical tube thoracostomy can be utilized to continue to drain the air. Large-borechest tubes are not necessary to drain the air present in a pneumothorax. If ongoingair leak is present after ~5 days, then the patient should be referred for thoracoscopyto staple the blebs and perform pleural abrasion. This procedure is also recom-mended for those individuals who develop recurrent pneumothoraces, which occursin ~50% of individuals with a primary spontaneous pneumothorax. If the pneumo-thorax is small (<15%), observation and administration of 100% oxygen is an optionfor treatment. Use of 100% oxygen speeds reabsorption of the pneumothorax by pro-moting diffusion of air that is composed of a nitrogen and oxygen mixture back intothe lungs.
VI-8. The answer is C.   (Chap. 273)   Primary pulmonary hypertension is an uncommon dis-
ease that usually affects young females. Early in the illness affected persons often are diag-nosed as psychoneurotic because of the vague nature of the presenting complaints, forexample, dyspnea, chest pain, and evidence of hyperventilation without hypoxemia onarterial blood gas testing. However, progression of the disease leads to syncope in approx-imately one-half of cases and signs of right heart failure on physical examination. Chestx-ray typically shows enlarged central pulmonary arteries with or without attenuation ofperipheral markings. The diagnosis of primary pulmonary hypertension is made by doc-umenting elevated pressures by right heart catheterization and excluding other patho-logic processes. Lung disease of sufﬁcient severity to cause pulmonary hypertensionwould be evident by history and on examination. Major differential diagnoses includethromboemboli and heart disease; outside the United States, schistosomiasis and ﬁlaria-sis are common causes of pulmonary hypertension, and a careful travel history should betaken.
256 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-9. The answer is E.   (Chap. 256)   This patient is presenting with massive pulmonary embo-
lus with ongoing hypotension, right ventricular dysfunction, and profound hypoxemia re-
quiring 100% oxygen. In this setting, continuing with anticoagulation alone is inadequate,and the patient should receive circulatory support with ﬁbrinolysis, if there are no contrain-dications to therapy. The major contraindications to ﬁbrinolysis include hypertension>180/110 mmHg, known intracranial disease or prior hemorrhagic stroke, recent surgery,or trauma. The recommended ﬁbrinolytic regimen is recombinant tissue plasminogen acti-vator (rTPA), 100 mg IV over 2 h. Heparin should be continued with the ﬁbrinolytic to pre-vent a rebound hypercoagulable state with dissolution of the clot. There is a 10% risk ofmajor bleeding with ﬁbrinolytic therapy with a 1–3% risk of intracranial hemorrhage. Theonly indication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for ﬁbrinolysis in pul-monary embolus (PE) is for massive PE presenting with life-threatening hypotension, rightventricular dysfunction, and refractory hypoxemia. In submassive PE presenting with pre-served blood pressure and evidence of right ventricular dysfunction on echocardiogram,the decision to pursue ﬁbrinolysis is made on a case-by-case situation. In addition to ﬁbri-nolysis, the patient should also receive circulatory support with vasopressors. Dopamineand dobutamine are the vasopressors of choice for the treatment of shock in PE. Cautionshould be taken with ongoing high-volume ﬂuid administration as a poorly functioningright ventricle may be poorly tolerant of additional ﬂuids. Ongoing ﬂuids may worsen rightventricular ischemia and further dilate the right ventricle, displacing the interventricularNomenclature and Classiﬁcation of Pulmonary Hypertension
Diagnostic Classiﬁcation
1. Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Primary pulmonary hypertension: sporadic and familial
Related to
a. Collagen-vascular diseaseb. Congenital systemic to pulmonary shuntsc. Portal hypertensiond. HIV infectione. Drugs/toxins: anorexigens and otherf. Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborng. Other
2. Pulmonary venous hypertension
Left-side atrial or ventricular heart disease
Left-side valvular heart diseaseExtrinsic compression of central pulmonary veins: ﬁbrosing mediastinitis and adenopathy/
tumors
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease
Other
3. Pulmonary hypertension associated with disorders of the respiratory system and/or hypoxemia
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Chronic exposure to high altitudeInterstitial lung disease Neonatal lung disease
Sleep-disordered breathing Alveolar-capillary dysplasia
Alveolar hypoventilatory disorders Other
4. Pulmonary hypertension due to chronic thrombotic and/or embolic disease
Thromboembolic obstruction of proximal pulmonary arteriesObstruction of distal pulmonary arteries
a. Pulmonary embolism (thrombus, tumor, ova and/or parasites, foreign material)b. In-situ thrombosisc. Sickle cell disease
5. Pulmonary hypertension due to disorders directly affecting the pulmonary vasculature
Inﬂammatory: Schistosomiasis; Sarcoidosis; otherPulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 257
septum to the left to worsen cardiac output and hypotension. If the patient had contraindi-
cations to ﬁbrinolysis and was unable to be stabilized with vasopressor support, referral forsurgical embolectomy should be considered. Referral for inferior vena cava ﬁlter placementis not indicated at this time. The patient should be stabilized hemodynamically as a ﬁrstpriority. The indications for inferior vena cava ﬁlter placement are active bleeding, preclud-ing anticoagulation, and recurrent deep venous thrombosis on adequate anticoagulation.
VI-10, VI-11, VI-12, and VI-13.  The answers are C, B, D, and A, respectively.   (Chap. 246)   Ventila-
tory function can be easily measured with lung volume measurement and the FEV
1/FVC ra-
tio. A decreased FEV 1/FVC ratio diagnoses obstructive lung disease. Alternatively, low lung
volumes, speciﬁcally decreased TLC, and occasionally decreased RV diagnose restrictive lungdisease. With extensive air trapping in obstructive lung disease, TLC is often increased andRV may also be increased. VC is proportionally decreased. MIP measures respiratory musclestrength and is decreased in patients with neuromuscular disease. Thus, myasthenia graviswill produce low lung volumes and decreased MIP , whereas patients with idiopathic pulmo-nary ﬁbrosis will have normal muscle strength and subsequently a normal MIP but de-creased TLC and RV . In some cases of pulmonary parenchymal restrictive lung disease, theincrease in elastic recoil results in an increased FEV
1/FVC ratio. The hallmark of obstructive
lung disease is a decreased FEV 1/FVC ratio; thus, the correct answer for Q VI-13 is A.
VI-14. The answer is D.   (Chap. 257)   Thoracentesis is indicated for any patient presenting with
pneumonia and a pleural effusion more than 10 mm thick on lateral decubitus imagingbecause a signiﬁcant percentage of these patients will show evidence of bacterial invasionand require further intervention. Other indications for thoracentesis for pleural effusionsthat complicate pneumonias include loculation of the pleural ﬂuid and evidence of thick-ened parietal pleura on chest CT. The pleural ﬂuid should be sent for cell count, differen-tial, pH, protein, LDH, glucose, and culture with Gram stain. This will allow one todifferentiate a simple parapneumonic effusion from a complicated one or from empyema.All effusions complicating pneumonia should be exudative, meeting at least one of Light’scriteria: (1) pleural ﬂuid protein/serum protein over 0.5, (2) pleural ﬂuid LDH/serumLDH over 0.6, and (3) pleural ﬂuid LDH more than two-thirds of the normal upper limitfor serum. Factors that increase the likelihood that tube thoracostomy will have to be per-formed include loculated pleural ﬂuid, pH below 7.20, pleural ﬂuid glucose below 60 mg/dL, positive Gram stain or culture of pleural ﬂuid, and presence of gross pus on aspiration.
VI-15. The answer is C.   (Chap. 254)   The only therapy that has been proved to improve survival
in patients with COPD is oxygen in the subset of patients with resting hypoxemia. This pa-tient probably has resting hypoxemia resulting from the presence of an elevated jugularvenous pulse, pedal edema, and an elevated hematocrit. Theophylline has been shown toincrease exercise tolerance in patients with COPD through a mechanism other than bron-chodilation. Glucocorticoids are not indicated in the absence of an acute exacerbation andmay lead to complications if they are used indiscriminately. Atenolol and enalapril have nospeciﬁc role in therapy for COPD but are often used when there is concomitant illness.
VI-16.  and.  VI-17.  The answers are E and E.   (Chap. 33)   The mountain climber is at risk for two
well-described altitude-related conditions: high-altitude cerebral edema and high-altitudepulmonary edema. High-altitude pulmonary edema is a well-described subset of pulmonaryedema. Other causes of pulmonary edema include cardiogenic, neurogenic, and noncardio-genic (as seen in acute respiratory distress syndrome). Although the exact mechanism of thisdisorder is unclear, one commonly accepted hypothesis suggests that increased cardiac outputand hypoxic vasoconstriction with resultant pulmonary hypertension combine to cause high-pressure pulmonary edema. Persons less than 25 years old are more likely than are older per-sons to develop this condition, probably because hypoxic vasoconstriction of the pulmonaryarteries is more pronounced in this population. Persons who regularly live at high altitudesare still at risk for high-altitude pulmonary edema when they descend to a lower altitude andthen return to higher areas. Prevention can be achieved by means of prophylactic administra-tion of acetazolamide and gradual ascent to higher altitudes. Once this condition develops,the most important therapy is to descend to a lower altitude. Other therapies include oxygento decrease hyopoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and diuretic therapy as needed.
258 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-18. The answer is B.   (Chap. 253)   Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis are at risk for colonization
and/or infection with a number of pathogens, and in general these infections have a tem-
poral relationship. In childhood, the most frequently isolated organisms are Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae and Staphylococcus aureus . As patients age, Pseudomonas aeruginosa becomes
the predominant pathogen. Interestingly, Aspergillus fumigatus is found in the airways of
up to 50% of cystic ﬁbrosis patients. All these organisms merely colonize the airways butoccasionally can also cause disease. Burkholderia (previously called Pseudomonas )cepacia
can occasionally be found in the sputum of cystic ﬁbrosis patients, where it is alwayspathogenic and is associated with a rapid decline in both clinical parameters and pulmo-nary function testing. Atypical mycobacteria can occasionally be found in the sputumbut are often merely colonizers. Acinetobacter baumannii is not associated with cystic ﬁ-
brosis; rather, it is generally found in nosocomial infections.
VI-19. The answer is F .   (Chap. 260)   The most common cause of mortality in patients who
have undergone lung transplantation is chronic allograft rejection, also known as bron-chiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS). This disorder results from ﬁbroproliferation of thesmall airways with resultant airﬂow obstruction. Histologically, there is an absence ofacute inﬂammation. Clinically, the diagnosis is made by a sustained fall of 20% or morein FEV
1 in the setting of airﬂow limitation. Alternatively, the diagnosis can be made on
lung biopsy. Risk factors for the development of BOS include acute rejection episodesand lymphocytic bronchiolitis. CMV pneumonitis has inconsistently been named as arisk factor as well. With a prevalence in lung transplant recipients of 50% at 3 years, thisdisorder is the main limitation on long-term survival after lung transplantation. Thesepatients often have concurrent bacterial infection or colonization that may improve withtherapy. When identiﬁed, chronic rejection or BOS generally is treated with increasedimmunosuppression. However, no controlled trials have shown consistent efﬁcacy of thisapproach, and anecdotally the results appear to be poor.
VI-20. The answer is B.   (Chap. 250)   Asbestos was a commonly used insulating material from
the 1940s to the mid-1970s, after which it was largely replaced by ﬁberglass and slag wool.Workers in many occupations had signiﬁcant exposure and often did not use protectiveequipment. There are several pulmonary manifestations of asbestos exposure in thelungs, the most important of which are pleural plaques, benign asbestos pleural effu-sions, asbestosis, lung cancer, and mesothelioma. Pleural plaques, which appear as calciﬁ-cations or thickening along the parietal pleura, simply suggest exposure and notpulmonary impairment. Benign pleural effusions can occur and are often bloody. Theymay regress or progress spontaneously. Asbestosis refers to interstitial lung disease, gen-erally with ﬁbrosis, seen in the lower lung ﬁelds of a chest radiogram or chest CT and anassociated restrictive ventilatory defect. This patient does not have interstitial changes onchest radiography and has no restriction on pulmonary function tests; therefore, he doesnot have asbestosis. The risk of lung cancer, including squamous cell cancer and adeno-carcinoma, is elevated in all patients with asbestos exposure but is ampliﬁed further bycigarette smoking. In contrast, mesothelioma risk, though elevated in patients with as-bestos exposure, is not increased by cigarette smoking. Interestingly, despite the high riskof malignancies in this group of patients, no beneﬁt has been ascribed to screening tech-niques, including biannual chest radiograms.
VI-21. The answer is C.   (Chap. 251)   The decision to hospitalize a patient with community-
acquired pneumonia (CAP) must be individualized and considerate of the markedly in-creased cost of inpatient care. The CURB-65 criteria are a severity of illness score that canbe helpful in identifying patients with low-risk disease who may not require hospitaliza-tion. The CURB-65 criteria include: Confusion, B UN≥20 mg/dL, respiratory rate ≥30
breaths/min, blood pressure ≤90 systolic or ≤60 diastolic, and age > 65. Patients with a
score of 0 or 1 have a <4% mortality. Patients with a score of 2 have a 30-day mortality ofalmost 10% and should likely be admitted to the hospital. Patients with a score of 3–5have >20% 30-day mortality and may warrant ICU care. All of the patients except patientC have 0 or 1 scores and could be considered candidates for outpatient treatment. Patient
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 259
D may warrant further evaluation for her confusion. Another objective system, the Pneu-
monia Severity Index (PSI) requires 20 variables but is more widely studied. Its use hasbeen associated with lower admission rates for less sick patients. Whatever objective scor-ing criteria are used, management and treatment decisions should be tempered by indi-vidual patient factors including underlying disease, adherence factors, social support, andother resources.
VI-22. The answer is E.   (Chap. 263)   Modes of ventilation differ in how breaths are triggered,
cycled, and limited. The ﬁgure shows the ventilator pressure waveform in the top paneland volume delivered in the bottom panel. When considering the pressure waveforms,there are several breaths that are triggered by patient effort, which is indicated by a dropin the airway pressure below 0. In addition, the last breath in the ﬁgure shows no drop inairway pressure. This indicates a machine-triggered breath. Thus, the mode used allowsboth patient-triggered and machine-triggered ventilation. The volume waveform alsoprovides additional information to determine the mode of mechanical ventilation that isdepicted here. Two of the patient-triggered breaths are associated with small inspiredtidal volumes, whereas the other two breaths (one patient-triggered and one machine-triggered) deliver the same tidal volume. The larger breaths are volume-cycled, and thesmaller breaths reﬂect the spontaneous tidal volume of the patient. This type of ventila-tion is characteristic of synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV). SIMVallows spontaneous ventilation by the patient but delivers a mandatory prescribedminute ventilation. Often, SIMV is combined with pressure support ventilation so thatthe patient has ventilatory assistance during a spontaneous ventilatory effort. SIMV issometimes used in ventilator weaning and in individuals with obstructive lung disease toprevent development of intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) that may de-velop with assist control mode ventilation. With assist control mode ventilation, patienttriggering of the ventilator results in delivery of the prescribed tidal volume with eachbreath. In patients with a high respiratory rate, this can result in hyperventilation and in-trinsic PEEP due to inadequate time for exhalation of the full tidal volume.
Pressure-control and pressure-support ventilation are pressure-cycled, rather than vol-
ume-cycled, modes of ventilation. In pressure-control ventilation, the physician sets an in-spiratory pressure level, and the tidal volume delivered may be variable on a breath-to-breathbasis, as the machine will continue to deliver inspiratory volume until the preset pressure isreached. Breaths can be machine-triggered or patient-triggered in this mode of ventilation.With pressure-support ventilation, breaths are patient triggered. When the patient initiates abreath, the ventilator raises the inspiratory pressure to the level prescribed by the physician,assisting with ventilation. The pressure will remain at this level until the ventilator senses thatthe inspiratory ﬂow has declined to a preset threshold determined by the ventilator.
Continuous positive airway pressure provides a set pressure that is usually between 5
and 10 cmH
2O throughout respiration. All respiratory efforts must be triggered by the pa-
tient, and the tidal volume relies on the inspiratory efforts of the patient. This is not a truesupport mode of ventilation and is frequently used to assess acceptability for extubation.
VI-23. The answer is C.   (Chap. 256)   In determining the appropriate regimen for venous
thromboembolism prophylaxis, one must consider the risk associated with the patientand/or the procedure. High-risk patients include those who undergo orthopedic proce-dures involving the knee or pelvis, those with a hip or pelvis fracture, and those who haveundergone gynecologic cancer surgery. Generally, these patients should receive an aggres-sive approach to thromboembolism prophylaxis, including warfarin with a goal INR of2.0 to 2.5 for 4 to 6 weeks, twice-daily subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin, orintermittent pneumatic compression devices plus warfarin. Moderate-risk patients, in-cluding those undergoing gynecologic, urologic, thoracic, or abdominal surgery, andmedically ill patients can be appropriately treated with subcutaneous unfractionatedheparin plus graded compression stockings or intermittent pneumatic compression de-vices. Low-risk patients do not require medications or devices for prophylaxis but shouldbe encouraged to ambulate frequently.
260 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-24. The answer is D.   (Chap. 252)   The combination of infertility and recurrent sinopulmo-
nary infections should prompt consideration of an underlying disorder of ciliary dys-
function that is termed primary ciliary dyskinesia. These disorders account forapproximately 5 to 10% of cases of bronchiectasis. A number of deﬁciencies have beendescribed, including malfunction of dynein arms, radial spokes, and microtubules. Allorgan systems that require ciliary function are affected. The lungs rely on cilia to beat res-piratory secretions proximally and subsequently to remove inspired particles, especiallybacteria. In the absence of this normal host defense, recurrent bacterial respiratory infec-tions occur and can lead to bronchiectasis. Otitis media and sinusitis are common for thesame reason. In the genitourinary tract, sperm require cilia to provide motility. Karta-gener’s syndrome is a combination of sinusitis, bronchiectasis, and situs inversus. It ac-counts for approximately 50% of patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia. Cystic ﬁbrosisis associated with infertility and bilateral upper lobe inﬁltrates, it causes a decreasednumber of sperm or absent sperm on analysis because of the congenital absence of thevas deferens. Sarcoidosis, which is often associated with bihilar adenopathy, is not gener-ally a cause of infertility. Water balloon–shaped heart is found in those with pericardialeffusions, which one would not expect in this patient.
VI-25. The answer is C.   (Chap. 246)   
In this patient presenting with multilobar pneumonia,
hypoxemia is present that does not correct with increasing the concentration of in-
spired oxygen. The inability to overcome hypoxemia or the lack of a notable increasein Pa
O2 with increasing fraction of inspired oxygen (F IO2) physiologically deﬁnes a
shunt. A shunt occurs when deoxygenated blood is transported to the left heart and sys-
temic circulation without having the capability of becoming oxygenated. Causes of shuntinclude alveolar collapse (atelectasis), intraalveolar ﬁlling processes, intrapulmonary vas-cular malformations, or structural cardiac disease leading to right-to-left shunt. In thiscase, the patient has multilobar pneumonia leading to alveoli that are being perfused butunable to participate in gas exchange because they are ﬁlled with pus and inﬂammatoryexudates. Acute respiratory distress syndrome is another common cause of shunt physi-ology. Ventilation-perfusion (V• /Q•) mismatch is the most common cause of hypoxemia
and results when there are some alveolar units with low V• /Q• ratios (low ventilation to
perfusion) that fail to fully oxygenate perfused blood. When blood is returned to the leftheart, the poorly oxygenated blood admixes with blood from normal V• /Q• alveolar units.
The resultant hypoxemia is less severe than with shunt and can be corrected with increas-ing the inspired oxygen concentration. Hypoventilation with or without other causes ofhypoxemia is not present in this case as the Pa
CO2 <40 mmHg, indicating hyperventila-
tion. The acidosis present in this case is of a metabolic rather than a pulmonary source.Because the patient is paralyzed, she is unable to increase her respiratory rate above theset rate to compensate for the metabolic acidosis.
VI-26. The answer is D.   (Chap. 164)   This patient presents with the classic ﬁndings of severe
leptospirosis (Weil’s syndrome). Leptospires are spirochetes that persist in the renal tu-bules of a variety of animal reservoirs. The most important reservoir is the rat, and hu-mans are infected after exposure to rat urine. Exposure to rodent urine followed by aﬂulike illness approximately 1 week later is typical for anicteric leptospirosis. Many ofthese patients with mild disease have resolution of their symptoms within a week andthen develop a recurrence after 1 to 3 days during the immune phase. It is during the im-mune phase that patients develop aseptic meningitis. A minority of patients with lep-tospirosis develop Weil’s syndrome, which is characterized by severe jaundice withoutevidence of hepatocellular damage, acute renal failure, and respiratory failure. Conjuncti-val suffusion is a classic physical ﬁnding. Rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, shock, and adultrespiratory distress syndrome may develop. The diagnosis is usually established by serol-ogy; culture is performed in reference laboratories and takes weeks. In cases of presump-tive severe leptospirosis, therapy with penicillin, amoxicillin, erythromycin, ordoxycycline should be initiated. Newer-generation cephalosporins have in vitro activity,but no clinical studies have evaluated in vivo efﬁcacy. Severe leptospirosis is epidemiolog-ically and clinically similar to hantavirus infection.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 261
VI-27. The answer is C.   (Chap. 257)   This patient is presenting with a large unilateral pleural ef-
fusion. By Light’s criteria, the effusion is exudative in nature. Light’s criteria are: (1) pleural
ﬂuid protein/serum protein >0.5; (2) pleural ﬂuid LDH/serum LDH >0.6; (3) pleural ﬂuidLDH >2/3 of the upper limits of normal. In addition, the pleural ﬂuid has a lymphocyticpredominance. In this patient who is a smoker with abnormal lymph nodes in the mediasti-num, the most likely cause of an exudative effusion with excess lymphocytes is malignancy,likely due to a lung cancer. Of the choices listed, sending the pleural ﬂuid for cytology is thebest test to determine the cause of the pleural effusion. If this is unsuccessful, considerationof thoracoscopic biopsy of the pleura or bronchoscopic biopsy of the mediastinal lymphnodes should be considered. Mediastinoscopy could also be considered. The patient shouldreceive screening mammography yearly as indicated by her age, but this is not the bestchoice for diagnosis of the pleural effusion. The patient has no symptoms to suggest an in-fection, and lymphocytic predominance in the pleural ﬂuid is not consistent with a para-pneumonic effusion. Thus, pleural ﬂuid culture is unlikely to yield the diagnosis.
VI-28. The answer is B.   (Chap. 31)   Antibiotics are tremendously overprescribed for the pre-
sumptive diagnosis of acute sinusitis. Acute bacterial sinusitis is uncommon in patientswith symptoms of less than 7 days’ duration even in the presence of purulent discharge.Most cases are due to viral infections. Decongestants and nasal lavage should be pre-scribed initially. In a patient with a known history of allergic rhinitis, nasal corticoster-oids may be added. Empirical antibiotic therapy may be prescribed for patients whosesymptoms do not improve with conservative therapy after 1 week and patients with aknown predisposition to sinus infection (e.g., cystic ﬁbrosis). Imaging of the sinusesshould not be performed in routine cases. For recurrent or persistent sinusitis, CT is pre-ferred to standard sinus radiography. Aspiration should be performed when there isknown opaciﬁcation of a sinus and empirical therapy has not been effective or the patientis at risk of opportunistic infection. In the absence of nasal perforation, lung symptomsor signs, or renal disease that raises suspicion of vasculitis or Wegener’s granulomatosis,measurement of serum ANCA is not warranted.
VI-29. The answer is C.   (Chap. 246)   The residual volume of the lung is the amount of gas that
remains in the lung after a maximal expiratory effort. It is determined by airway closure.Residual volume is elevated in conditions that result in premature airway closure with expi-ration or due to inability to fully exhale due to muscle weakness or chest wall stiffness. Ofthe choices listed, only emphysema is associated with an increased residual volume. In em-physema, there is destruction of alveoli usually related to the effects of cigarette smoking.The destruction of alveoli leads to decreased traction on small airways and allows them tocollapse at higher lung volumes, resulting in an increased residual volume. When emphy-sema occurs concomitantly with chronic bronchitis, the airway inﬂammation characteristicof chronic bronchitis also leads to increased residual volume due to decreased airway diam-eter. Other disorders that lead to increased residual volume include asthma, diaphragmaticweakness, and kyphoscoliosis. Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis usually causes a decrease inresidual volume due to airway stiffness. Obesity should not affect residual volume.
VI-30. The answer is A.   (Chap. 192)   This patient comes from an area where histoplasmosis is
endemic (Ohio and Mississippi river valleys) and is complaining of classic, though non-speciﬁc, symptoms. Usually acute histoplasmosis resolves without therapy in the immu-nocompetent patient. Acute pulmonary histoplasmosis is a moderate to severe illnessthat can be fatal if not diagnosed promptly. It usually occurs 2–4 weeks after heavy expo-sure and presents with a ﬂulike illness. Parenchymal inﬁltrates with hilar and mediastinaladenopathy are typical. Fungal culture is the “gold standard,” test but fungal staining willyield positive results in about half of cases. The ﬁgure shows the classic narrow buddingyeast evident on silver stain. Symptomatic patients with respiratory histoplasmosisshould be treated with lipid amphotericin for 1–2 weeks followed by 6–12 weeks of itra-conazole. Glucocorticoids may be used as adjuvant therapy along with antifungals to de-crease inﬂammation. Ciproﬂoxacin and piperacillin/tazobactam have no antifungalactivity. Caspofungin is effective for treatment of candidiasis, not histoplasmosis.
262 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-31. The answers are 1-C; 2-B; 3-D; 4-A.   (Chaps. 264, 265, and 266)   A variety of vasopres-
sor agents are available for hemodynamic support. The effects of these medications are de-
pendent upon their effects on the sympathetic nervous system to produce changes in heartrate, cardiac contractility, and peripheral vascular tone. Stimulation of α -1 adrenergic re-
ceptors in the peripheral vasculature causes vasoconstriction and improves mean arterialpressure by increasing systemic vascular resistance. The β
1 receptors are located primarily
in the heart and cause increased cardiac contractility and heart rate. The β2 receptors are
found in the peripheral circulation and cause vasodilatation and bronchodilation. Phenyl-ephrine acts solely as an α-adrenergic agonist. It is considered a second-line agent in septic
shock and is often used in anesthesia to correct hypotension following induction of anes-thesia. Phenylephrine is also useful for spinal shock. The action of dopamine is dependentupon the dosage used. At high doses, dopamine has high afﬁnity for the α receptor whereas
at lower doses (<5 µg/kg per min) it does not. In addition, dopamine acts at β
1 receptors
and dopaminergic receptors. The effect on these receptors is greatest at lower doses. Nor-epinephrine and epinephrine affect both α and β
1 receptors to increase peripheral vascular
resistance, heart rate, and contractility. Norepinephrine has less β1 activity than epineph-
rine or dopamine and, thus, has less associated tachycardia. Norepinephrine and dopamineare the recommended ﬁrst-line therapies for septic shock. Epinephrine is the drug of choicefor anaphylactic shock. Dobutamine is primarily a β
1 agonist with lesser effects at the β2 re-
ceptor. Dobutamine increases cardiac output through improving cardiac contractility andheart rate. Dobutamine may be associated with development of hypotension because of itseffects at the β
2 receptor causing vasodilatation and decreased systemic vascular resistance.
VI-32. The answer is C.   (Chap. 28)   Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common sleep disorder
affecting up to 20% of the population, and the incidence of OSA is expected to increase asthe incidence of obesity has risen over the past 30 years. OSA is characterized by repetitiveevents during which the posterior oropharynx collapses with a marked decrease or ab-sence of airﬂow despite ongoing respiratory effort. Obstructive events are often associatedwith marked disruptions in sleep continuity with frequent arousals. Recurrent oxygen de-saturations, which may be very severe, also occur concurrently with obstructive sleep ap-nea events. The ﬁgure illustrates a typical obstructive sleep apnea event. In this ﬁgure, thenasal/oral airﬂow channel demonstrates a near absence of airﬂow despite ongoing respira-tory effort. Each obstructive event depicted in this illustration is associated with a con-comitant decrease in oxygen saturation from a baseline of 98% to 86–91% and lasts forabout 20–30 s. Central sleep apnea is diagnosed when there is an absence of airﬂow in as-sociation with an absence of respiratory effort lasting for at least 10 s. Cheyne-Stokes res-piration is a type of central sleep apnea characterized by a crescendo-decrescendo patternof respiratory effort and airﬂow. A period of apnea is terminated by a period of hyper-pnea. Unlike obstructive sleep apnea, arousals during Cheyne-Stokes respiration occurduring the hyperpneic phase of respiration rather than at the termination of the apnea.Cheyne-Stokes respiration is frequently seen in congestive heart failure and following cere-brovascular events. Periodic limb movement disorder of sleep is characterized by recurrentleg movements during sleep. The typical periodic limb movement is dorsiﬂexion of thegreat toe and ankle. Periodic limb movements become increasingly frequent with age, andmost are not associated with signiﬁcant sleep disruption or arousals.
VI-33.  and .VI-34.  The answers are E and D.   (Chap. 255)   Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP)
is a rare disorder with an incidence of approximately 1 in 1 million. The disease usually pre-sents between ages 30 and 50 and is slightly more common in men. Three distinct subtypeshave been described: congenital, acquired, and secondary (most frequently caused by acutesilicosis or hematologic malignancies). Interestingly, the pathogenesis of the disease hasbeen associated with antibodies to granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor(GM-CSF) in most cases of acquired disease in adults. The pathobiology of the disease isfailure of clearance of pulmonary surfactant. These patients typically present with subacutedyspnea on exertion with fatigue and low-grade fevers. Associated laboratory abnormalitiesinclude polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and increased LDH levels. Classically,the CT appearance is described as “crazy pavement” with ground-glass alveolar inﬁltrates in
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 263
a perihilar distribution and intervening areas of normal lung. Bronchoalveolar lavage is di-
agnostic, with large amounts of amorphous proteinaceous material seen. Macrophagesﬁlled with PAS-positive material are also frequently seen. The treatment of choice is whole-lung lavage through a double-lumen endotracheal tube. Survival at 5 years is higher than95%, although some patients will need a repeat whole-lung lavage. Secondary infection, es-pecially with Nocardia, is common, and these patients should be followed closely.
VI-35.  and.  VI-36.  The answers are B and C.   (Chap. 264)   Hypovolemic shock is the most common
form of shock and occurs due to either hemorrhage or loss of plasma volume in the form ofgastrointestinal, urinary, or insensible losses. Symptoms of hemorrhagic and nonhemorrhagicshock are indistinguishable. Mild hypovolemia is considered to be loss of <20% of the bloodvolume and usually presents with few clinical signs save for mild tachycardia. Loss of 20–40%of the blood volume typically induces orthostasis. Loss of >40% of the blood volume leads tothe classic manifestations of shock: marked tachycardia, hypotension, oliguria, and ﬁnally ob-tundation. Central nervous system perfusion is maintained until shock becomes severe. Oligu-ria is a very important clinical parameter that should help guide volume resuscitation.
After assessing for an adequate airway and spontaneous breathing, initial resuscitation
aims at reexpanding the intravascular volume and controlling ongoing losses. Volume re-suscitation should be initiated with rapid IV infusion of isotonic saline or Ringer’s lac-tate. In head-to-head trials, colloidal solutions have not added any beneﬁt compared tocrystalloid, and in fact appeared to increase mortality for trauma patients. Hemorrhagicshock with ongoing blood losses and a hemoglobin ≤10 g/dL should be treated with
transfusion of packed red blood cells (pRBCs). Once hemorrhage is controlled, transfu-sion of packed RBCs should be performed only for hemoglobin ≤7 g/dL. Patients who re-
main hypotensive after volume resuscitation have a very poor prognosis. Inotropicsupport and intensive monitoring should be initiated in these patients.
FIGURE VI-36 An algorithm for the re-
suscitation of the patient in shock. VS,
vital signs; HR, heart rate; SBP , systolic
blood pressure; W/U, work up; CVP , central
venous pressure; Hct, hematocrit; ECHO,echocardiogram; PAC, pulmonary arterycatheter; CI, cardiac index in (L/min) per
m
2; PCWP , pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure in mmHg. *Monitor SV O2, SVRI,
and RVEDVI as additional markers of cor-
rection for perfusion and hypovolemia.
Consider age-adjusted CI. SV O2, saturation
of hemoglobin with O2 in venous blood;
SVRI, systemic vascular resistance index;
RVEDVI, right-ventricular end-diastolic
volume index.Monitor CI deterioration
Maintain optimal PCWP *
• Crystalloid
• Blood (Hct ≥30)Hypotension and/or Tachycardia
• Airway control• Assure ventilation• Augment circulation  (crystalloid +/– blood)
Consider cardiac dysfunctionor tamponade• ECHO• Treat appropriatelyVS Unstable
HR >120 and/or SBP<90 VS Normalized
Definitive W/U
Insert PAC VS unstable or acidosis worsensCentral monitoring
CVP <15 CVP >15
CI <3.5; 15< PCWP <25Administer crystalloid +/– blood   • Hct >30   • CVP >15
Administer 500 mL crystalloid
boluses until preload     maximal CI
(Starling curve)CI <3.5; PCWP <15
Administer crystalloid
+/– blood
PCWP >15, Hct >30* *CI <3.5; PCWP >25
• Inotrope as indicated• Consider ECHO
264 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-37. The answer is B.   (Chap. 246)   The patient in this presentation is presenting after a nar-
cotic overdose, which leads to hypoxia because of hypoventilation. The major causes of
hypoxemia are hypoventilation, shunt, and V• /Q•mismatch. Diffusing defects can also
cause hypoxemia but are a much less frequent cause. A ﬁnal cause of hypoxemia to con-sider is decreased concentration of oxygen in inspired air, which is only present at alti-tude or in the setting of medical equipment malfunction. When evaluating a patient withhypoxia, it is important to consider whether the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient is nor-mal or elevated. Of the causes of hypoxia, only hypoventilation and decreased fraction ofinspired oxygen will cause hypoxia with a normal 
A – a gradient. The formula for calcu-
lating the alveolar oxygen concentration is:
PAO2 = ((P atm – P H2O)*(F IO2)) – (Pa CO2/R),
where P atm = atmospheric pressure,
PH2O = water vapor pressure,
FIO2= fraction of inspired oxygen, and 
R = respiratory quotient.When values are substituted assuming usual conditions at sea level and with the patient
breathing room air, the equation is simpliﬁed to:
P
AO2 = (760 – 47)(0.21) – (Pa CO2/0.8) = 150 – Pa CO2/0.8
In this patient, the calculated P AO2 is 50. Thus, the A – a gradient is 8 mmHg (normal
value <15 mmHg) and is normal. Thus, the only correct answer is B.
VI-38. The answer is D.   (Chap. 246)   The functional residual capacity (FRC) is the volume of
gas that remains within the lungs at the end of a normal tidal respiration. The FRC com-
prises the expiratory reserve volume (ERV) and the residual volume (RV). The ERV is theadditional volume of gas that can be forcefully exhaled from the lung after completing apassive exhalation. The RV is the amount of gas that remains in the lung after a maximalexpiratory effort. The lung volume at FRC reﬂects equilibrium between the lung elasticrecoil pressure inward and the outward forces generated by the chest wall.
VI-39. The answer is D.   (Chap. 258)   Respiratory muscular disorders rarely cause chronic hy-
poventilation unless there is signiﬁcant diaphragmatic weakness. Myasthenia gravis,muscular dystrophy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and other chronic myopathies that in-volve peripheral musculature as well as the diaphragm should be considered when thereare signs or symptoms of diaphragmatic weakness. Upright chest radiographs may showdiaphragm elevation but are usually normal. When diaphragm weakness is present,forced vital capacity will be >10–15% lower in the supine position than in the uprightposition, and maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures will be reduced. Transdia-phragmatic pressure gradients (esophageal minus gastric pressures) can also be measuredas a conﬁrmatory test. Diffusing capacity has little diagnostic value; it is mostly useful as aphysiologic measure and a predictor of oxygen desaturation with exercise. It is usuallynormal in muscle weakness. A normal perfusion scan has a high negative predictive valuefor ruling out pulmonary embolism; an angiogram is not indicated. CT scan of the headwould not be useful in diagnosing myasthenia gravis or other motor neuron diseases.
VI-40. The answer is B.   (Chap. 257)   The most common cause of pleural effusion is left ven-
tricular failure. Pleural effusions occur in heart failure when there are increased hydro-static forces increasing the pulmonary interstitial ﬂuid and the lymphatic drainage isinadequate to remove the ﬂuid. Right-sided effusions are more common than left-sidedeffusions in heart failure. Thoracentesis would show a transudative ﬂuid. Pneumonia canbe associated with a parapneumonic effusion or empyema. Parapneumonic effusions arethe most common cause of exudative pleural effusions and are second only to heart fail-ure as a cause of pleural effusions. Empyema refers to a grossly purulent pleural effusion.Malignancy is the second most common cause of exudative pleural effusion. Breast andlung cancers and lymphoma cause 75% of all malignant pleural effusions. On thoracen-tesis, the effusion is exudative. Cirrhosis and pulmonary embolus are far less commoncauses of pleural effusions.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 265
VI-41. The answer is D.   (Chap. 264)   The patient above is in cardiogenic shock from an ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Shock is a clinical syndrome in which vital organs do not
receive adequate perfusion. Understanding the physiology underlying shock is a crucialfactor in determining appropriate management. Cardiac output is the major determinantof tissue perfusion and is the product of stroke volume and heart rate. In turn, stroke vol-ume is determined by preload, or ventricular ﬁlling, afterload, or resistance to ventricularejection, and contractility of the myocardium. In this patient, the hypoxic and damagedmyocardium has suddenly lost much of its contractile function, and stroke volume willtherefore decrease rapidly, dropping cardiac output. Systemic vascular resistance will in-crease in order to improve return of blood to the heart and increase stroke volume. Cen-tral venous pressure is elevated as a consequence of increased vascular resistance,decreased cardiac output and poor forward ﬂow, and neuroendocrine-mediated vaso-constriction. The pathophysiology of other forms of shock is shown as a comparison.
VI-42. The answer is A.   (Chap. 256; Ridker et al, 1995.)   Many patients who develop pulmo-
nary thromboembolism have an underlying inherited predisposition that remains clini-cally silent until they are subjected to an additional stress, such as the use of oralcontraceptive pills, surgery, or pregnancy. The most frequently inherited predispositionto thrombosis is so-called activated protein C resistance. The inability of a normal pro-tein C to carry out its anticoagulant function is due to a missense mutation in the genecoding for factor V in the coagulation cascade. This mutation, which results in the substi-tution of a glutamine for an arginine residue in position 506 of the factor V molecule, istermed the factor V Leiden gene. Based on the Physicians Health Study, about 3% ofhealthy male physicians carry this particular missense mutation. Carriers are clearly at anincreased risk for deep venous thrombosis and also for recurrence after the discontinua-tion of warfarin. The allelic frequency of factor V Leiden is higher than that of all otheridentiﬁed inherited hypercoagulable states combined, including deﬁciencies of protein C,protein S, and antithrombin III and disorders of plasminogen.
VI-43. The answer is B.   (Chap. 260)   The optimal timing for lung transplantation is critical to
improve survival and add quality-adjusted life years. Individuals with cystic ﬁbrosisshould be considered for lung transplantation when the FEV
1 is <30% predicted values
or is rapidly falling. Other indications for referral in cystic ﬁbrosis include Pa O2 <50
mmHg on room air, Pa CO2 >50 mmHg, pulmonary arterial hypertension, increasing hos-
pitalization, and recurrent hemoptysis.
VI-44. The answer is E.   (Chap. 256)   Warfarin should not be used alone as initial therapy for the
treatment of venous thromboembolic disease (VTE) for two reasons. First, warfarin does notachieve full anticoagulation for at least 5 days as its mechanism of action is to decrease theproduction of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors in the liver. Secondly, a paradoxicalreaction that promotes coagulation may also occur upon initiation of warfarin as it also de-creases the production of the vitamin K–dependent anticoagulants protein C and protein S,which have shorter half-lives than the procoagulant factors. For many years, unfractionatedheparin delivered IV was the treatment of choice for VTE. However, it requires frequentmonitoring of aPTT levels and hospitalization until therapeutic INR is achieved with war-TABLE VI-41 Physiologic Characteristics of the V arious Forms of Shock
Type of ShockCVP and 
PCWPCardiac OutputSystemic Vascular ResistanceVenous O
2
Saturation
Hypovolemic ↓↓ ↑ ↓
Cardiogenic ↑↓ ↑ ↓
Septic
Hyperdynamic ↓↑ ↑ ↓ ↑
Hypodynamic ↓↑ ↓ ↑ ↑↓
Traumatic ↓↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓
Neurogenic ↓↓ ↓ ↓
Hypoadrenal ↓↑ ↓ =↓↓
Note:  CVP , central venous pressure; PCWP , pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
266 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
farin. There are now several safe and effective alternatives to unfractionated heparin that can
be delivered SC. Low-molecular-weight heparins (enoxaparin, tinzaparin) are fragments ofunfractionated heparin with a lower molecular weight. These compounds have a greater bio-availability, longer half-life, and more predictable onset of action. Their use in renal insufﬁ-ciency should be considered with caution because low-molecular-weight heparins are renallycleared. Fondaparinux is a direct factor Xa inhibitor that, like low-molecular-weight hep-arins, requires no monitoring of anticoagulant effects and has been demonstrated to be safeand effective in treating both deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
VI-45. The answer is B.   (Chap. 158)   M. tuberculosis is spread by droplet nuclei that are aero-
solized by coughing, sneezing, or speaking. The droplets dry quickly and may stay air-borne and subject to inhalation for hours. The probability of acquiring tuberculosis isrelated to the degree of infectiousness and the intimacy and duration of contact. Smear-positive patients have the greatest infectivity. Patients with cavitary, laryngeal, or endo-bronchial disease produce the most infectious organisms. Patients with smear-negative/culture-positive or disseminated disease are less infectious. Patients with culture-negative(treated) or extrapulmonary tuberculosis are essentially noninfectious. Patients with tu-berculosis who are HIV-infected also appear to be less infectious because of the lower fre-quency of cavitary disease. These factors emphasize the importance of public healthmeasures to control the transmission of tuberculosis.
VI-46. The answer is D.   (Chap. 255)   This patient’s presentation is typical of pulmonary Langer-
hans cell histiocytosis (eosinophilic granulomas). Cigarette smoking is virtually universalamong these patients. The disease may be found incidentally on radiograms or may presentwith respiratory and systemic complaints. Spontaneous pneumothorax is a common pre-sentation and occurs in approximately 25% of these patients. The radiographic combina-tion of small reticular/nodular opacities in the bases (with sparing of the costophrenicangle) and apical cysts is characteristic and virtually diagnostic. Pulmonary function testingwill show a reduced DLCO. Lung volumes may be normal or reduced, depending on the se-verity. Approximately 33% of these patients improve with smoking cessation, but most de-velop progressive interstitial disease. Immunosuppressive agents do not appear to inﬂuencethe course of disease. Intravenous α
1 antitrypsin may beneﬁt patients with deﬁciency, who
will present with lower lobe emphysema. Miliary tuberculosis radiographically appears withmultiple small nodules, but cysts are not typical. Pneumocystic carinii pneumonia (PCP)
may present with spontaneous pneumothorax in patients with HIV infection; however, thispatient has no apparent risk factors, and the small nodules on CT are not typical.
VI-47. The answer is E.   (Chap. 255)   This patient’s clinical presentation and CT imaging are
consistent with the diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), which is manifestedhistologically as usual interstitial pneumonitis (UIP). On microscopic examination, UIPis characterized by a heterogeneous appearance on low magniﬁcation with normal-appearing alveoli adjacent to severely ﬁbrotic alveoli. There is lymphocytic inﬁltrate andscattered foci of ﬁbroblasts within the alveolar septae. End-stage ﬁbrosis results in honey-combing with loss of all alveolar structure. The typical clinical presentation of IPF/UIP isslowly progressive exertional dyspnea with a nonproductive cough. Clinical examinationreveals dry crackles and digital clubbing. Patients with IPF are usually >50 years, andmore than two-thirds have a history of current or former tobacco use. A high-resolutionCT scan of the chest can be diagnostic, in the typical clinical situation of an older individ-ual, and shows subpleural pulmonary ﬁbrosis that is greatest at the lung bases. As diseaseprogresses, traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing are characteristic on CT scan. Thecause of UIP is unknown, and no therapies have been shown to improve survival in thisdisease with the exception of lung transplantation. Mortality is 50% within 3 years of di-agnosis. The presence of a dense periodic acid–Schiff positive amorphous material in al-veolar spaces is characteristic of pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Pulmonary alveolarproteinosis is an interstitial lung disease that presents with progressive dyspnea, and CTimaging shows characteristic “crazy paving” with ground-glass inﬁltrates and thickenedalveolar septae. Fibrosis is not present. Alveolar destruction with emphysematous
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 267
changes would be seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The presence
of crackles without wheezing or hyperinﬂation on examination does not suggest COPD.Furthermore, clubbing is not seen in COPD. Diffuse alveolar damage is seen in acute in-terstitial pneumonitis and acute respiratory distress syndrome. These disorders presentwith a rapid acute course that is not present in this case. The formation of noncaseatinggranulomas is typical of sarcoidosis, a systemic disease that usually presents in youngerindividuals. It is more common in those of African-American race. A typical CT in sar-coidosis would show interstitial inﬁltrates and hilar lymphadenopathy. End-stage diseasemay result in pulmonary ﬁbrosis, but it is greatest in the upper lobes.
VI-48. The answer is D.   (Chap. 263)   Determining when an individual is an appropriate can-
didate for a spontaneous breathing trial is important for the care of mechanically venti-lated patients. An important initial step in determining if a patient is likely to besuccessfully extubated is to evaluate the mental status of the patient. This can be difﬁcultif the patient is receiving sedation, and it is recommended that sedation be interruptedon a daily basis for a short period to allow assessment of mental status. Daily interruptionof sedation has been shown to decrease the duration of mechanical ventilation. If the pa-tient is unable to respond to any commands or is completely obtunded, this individual isat high risk for aspiration and unlikely to be successfully extubated. In addition, the pa-tient’s underlying medical condition should be stable, and the patient should be off vaso-pressor support. If these conditions are met, the patient should be on minimalventilatory support. This includes the ability to maintain the pH between 7.35 and 7.40and an Sa
O2 of >90% while receiving an F IO2≤0.5 and a PEEP ≤5 cmH 2O.
VI-49. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 34 and 142)   Bordetella pertussis  is becoming an increasingly
common cause of cough in adolescents and adults. Some studies have shown that pertussisis associated with 12–30% of prolonged coughing illnesses lasting >2 weeks. The clinicalmanifestations of pertussis infection are classically described by a catarrhal phase followedby a paroxysmal phase. The catarrhal phase begins after a 7-to-10-day incubation periodand lasts 1–2 weeks. This phase is marked by an upper respiratory illness that is similar insymptoms to the common cold, with low-grade fever, rhinitis, mild cough, and lacrima-tion. This is followed by a prolonged paroxysmal coughing phase during which coughingcan become quite severe. The term whooping cough  as a synonym for pertussis is derived
from the spasms of coughing that occur during the paroxysmal phase that are often termi-nated by an audible whoop. Posttussive emesis is frequent. Between paroxysms of cough,the patient is otherwise well. Sleep is often disturbed as the cough tends to be worse atnight. Usually this phase lasts from 2–4 weeks, with cough waning in severity after thispoint. The convalescent phase marks recovery from the illness and lasts from 1–3 months,during which time the cough gradually lessens in severity. Intercurrent viral illnesses thatoccur over the next year may cause a recurrence of paroxysmal cough. Diagnosis of pertus-sis in the paroxysmal phase of the illness relies on serologic testing of IgG and IgA antibod-ies to pertussis with evidence of a two- to fourfold increase in levels suggestive of recentinfection. Increasingly, a single specimen for serology can be obtained and compared toestablished population values. Therapy is not indicated as it does not substantially alter thecourse of disease except in the catarrhal phase. Other common causes of chronic cough in-clude asthma, allergic rhinitis with postnasal drip, and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease.Occasionally, asthma may present with cough alone. In these patients, a methacholinechallenge test is used to conﬁrm the diagnosis, especially in the setting of normal spirome-try. Peak expiratory ﬂow monitoring in the workplace is useful when an occupationalcause of asthma or chronic cough is suggested. Typical clinical features include symptomsthat increase over the work week and wane signiﬁcantly during time off work. Individualswith allergic rhinitis often develop cough as a result of postnasal drip, which can becomemore severe after upper respiratory illnesses. However, the severity of the cough withoutprior history of chronic rhinitis in this case argues against allergic rhinitis. Thus skin test-ing for allergens is not indicated. Finally, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease may also be asso-ciated with chronic cough and would be diagnosed with a 24-h pH probe. The precedingillness and abrupt onset of severe symptoms, however, are inconsistent with this diagnosis.
268 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-50. The answer is B.   (Chap. 250)   The patient presents with typical asthma symptoms;
however, the symptoms are escalating and now require nearly constant use of oral ster-
oids. It is of note that the symptoms are worse during weekdays and better on weekends.This ﬁnding suggests that there is an exposure during the week that may be triggering thepatient’s asthma. Often textile workers have asthma resulting from the inhalation of par-ticles. The ﬁrst step in diagnosing a work-related asthma trigger is to check FEV
1 before
and after the ﬁrst shift of the workweek. A decrease in FEV 1 would suggest an occupa-
tional exposure. Skin testing for allergies would not be likely to pinpoint the work-relatedexposure. Although A. fumigatus can be associated with worsening asthma from allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, this would not have a ﬂuctuation in symptomsthroughout the week. The patient does not require further testing to diagnose that he hasasthma; therefore, a methacholine challenge is not indicated. Finally, the exercise physiol-ogy test is generally used to differentiate between cardiac and pulmonary causes or de-conditioning as etiologies for shortness of breath.
VI-51. The answer is E.   (Chap. 259)   While clinical history can suggest a diagnosis of obstruc-
tive sleep apnea and can be strengthened by the use of objective sleep questionnaires suchas the Epworth Sleepiness Score, evidence of recurrent breathing disruptions during sleepis necessary to make the diagnosis. OSA is a condition requiring life-long therapy; diag-nosis should be based on objective ﬁndings such as those obtained from polysomnogra-phy. Limited sleep studies that measure one or two parameters may be cost-effectivewhen interpreted by experts; however, their predictive capacity does not compare favor-ably to a polysomnogram. Unfortunately there are at present no satisfactory pharmaco-logic options for patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Modaﬁnil has shown marginalimprovement in patients also using CPAP . It is expensive and not currently recom-mended as a ﬁrst-line agent. CPAP ventilation has been shown in double-blind random-ized clinical trials to improve virtually all aspects of disease in patients with OSA,including number of apneas and hypopneas, sleep quality, blood pressure, driving ability,mood, and quality of life. CPAP is often burdensome and uncomfortable at ﬁrst. Thebeneﬁts as well as the downsides of CPAP should be covered with patients. Another treat-ment option is the mandibular repositioning splint, which holds the tongue and lowerjaw forward in order to widen the pharyngeal airway. These too can be difﬁcult to use,and long-term compliance is poor. There are several surgical options for patients withnarrowed airways that are effective in carefully selected patients.
VI-52.  and.  VI-53.  The answers are C and D.    (Chap. 249)   The patient has a subacute presenta-
tion of hypersensitivity pneumonitis related to exposure to bird droppings and feathersat work. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction that hasa variety of presentations. Some people develop acute onset of shortness of breath, fevers,chills, and dyspnea within 6 to 8 h of antigen exposure. Others may present subacutelywith worsening dyspnea on exertion and dry cough over weeks to months. Chronic hy-persensitivity pneumonitis presents with more severe and persistent symptoms withclubbing. Progressive worsening is common with the development of chronic hypox-emia, pulmonary hypertension, and respiratory failure. The diagnosis relies on a varietyof tests. Peripheral eosinophilia is not a feature of this disease, although neutrophilia andlymphopenia are frequently present. Other nonspeciﬁc markers of inﬂammation may beelevated, including the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoidfactor, and serum immunoglobulins. If a speciﬁc antigen is suspected, serum precipitinsdirected toward that antigen may be demonstrated. Chest radiography may be normal orshow a diffuse reticulonodular inﬁltrate. High-resolution chest CT is the imaging modal-ity of choice and shows ground-glass inﬁltrates in the lower lobes. Centrilobular inﬁl-trates are often seen as well. In the chronic stages patchy emphysema is the most commonﬁnding. Histopathologically, interstitial alveolar inﬁltrates predominate, with a variety oflymphocytes, plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils and neutrophils seen. Loose, non-caseating granulomas are typical.
Treatment depends on removing the individual from exposure to the antigen. If this is
not possible, the patient should wear a mask that prevents small-particle inhalation dur-
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 269
ing exposure. In patients with mild disease, removal from antigen exposure alone may be
sufﬁcient to treat the disease. More severe symptoms require therapy with glucocorti-coids at an equivalent prednisone dose of 1 mg/kg daily for 7 to 14 days. The steroids arethen gradually tapered over 2 to 6 weeks.
VI-54. The answer is D.   (Chap. 252)   Bronchiectasis is deﬁned as an abnormal and permanent
dilatation of the bronchi. It can be focal or widespread in the lung. It typically affectsolder patients and is found more commonly in women than men. Bronchiectasis resultsfrom inﬂammation and destruction of the bronchial wall and is usually triggered by in-fection. Bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella  are common causes. Adeno-
virus and inﬂuenza virus are the main viruses that can cause bronchiectasis.Mycobacteria, including tuberculosis, are major causes worldwide. Patients with im-paired immunity to pulmonary infections, such as those with cystic ﬁbrosis or ciliarydysfunction, are highly susceptible to bronchiectasis. Patients frequently complain of re-current cough and purulent sputum. Frequent lung infections should raise suspicion ofthis diagnosis. Physical examination ﬁndings can be varied and are not sufﬁcient alonefor diagnosis. Rhonchi and wheezes can be heard over the affected area; severe cases maypresent with right-heart failure. Chest radiography often shows nonspeciﬁc ﬁndings.Honeycomb lung is characteristic of end-stage interstitial lung disease. High-resolutionCT of the chest is considered the standard technique to conﬁrm diagnosis of bronchiecta-sis. It will show the dilated airways beyond the central airways. If focal, it is most likelydue to prior necrotizing infection; however, mycobacterial infection ( M. tuberculosis , My-
cobacteria other than tuberculosis) should be considered. Diffuse bronchiectasis may bedue to cystic ﬁbrosis, immunoglobulin deﬁciency, ciliary dysfunction syndromes, α
1 an-
titrypsin deﬁciency, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, collagen vascular disease,or HIV infection.
VI-55. The answer is B.   (Chap. 255)   Pulmonary complications are common in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The most common manifestation is pleuritis withor without effusion. Other possible manifestations include pulmonary hemorrhage, dia-phragmatic dysfunction with loss of lung volumes (the so-called shrinking lung syn-drome), pulmonary vascular disease, acute interstitial pneumonitis, and bronchiolitisobliterans organizing pneumonia. Other systemic complications of SLE also cause pul-monary complications, including uremic pulmonary edema and infectious complica-tions. Chronic progressive pulmonary ﬁbrosis is not a complication of SLE.
VI-56. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 157 and 251)   The radiograph describes a lung abscess that
most likely is due to anaerobic infection. The anaerobes involved are most likely oral, butBacteroides fragilis is isolated in up to 10% of cases. Vancomycin, ciproﬂoxacin, and ceph-
alexin have no signiﬁcant activity against anaerobes. Most oral anaerobic strains have thecapacity to produce β-lactamase. For many years penicillin was considered the standard
treatment for anaerobic lung infections. However, clinical studies have demonstrated thesuperiority of clindamycin over penicillin in the treatment of lung abscess. When thereare contraindications to clindamycin, penicillin plus metronidazole is likely to be as ef-fective as clindamycin.
VI-57. The answer is E.   (Chap. 257)   Pleural effusions are commonly associated with pneumo-
nia and should be assessed via thoracentesis to determine whether the pleural ﬂuid is alsoinfected. A viscous, infected pleural ﬂuid can become organized following pneumonia,resulting in development of empyema or chronic pleural effusion with trapped lung thatis unable to reexpand. In order to prevent these complications, it is recommended that allpleural effusions separated from the chest wall by >10 mm undergo thoracentesis. Char-acteristics that predict increased likelihood of complications with a parapneumonic effu-sion include: loculated pleural ﬂuid, pleural ﬂuid pH <7.20, pleural ﬂuid glucose <60mg/dL, positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural ﬂuid, and presence of frank pus (em-pyema) of the pleural space. Individuals whose pleural ﬂuid has any of these characteris-tics should be considered for tube thoracostomy drainage of the pleural ﬂuid.
270 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-58. The answer is C.   (Chap. 260)   Compared with other solid organ transplants, lung trans-
plants have the highest mortality, with only a 50% survival after 5 years. The leading causes of
death in the early posttransplant period are infectious complications. Primary graft failure oc-curs immediately after the transplant and is sometimes called ischemia-reperfusion injury. Thiscan be fatal but can be treated with supportive care. Acute rejection occurs in ~50% of lungtransplant patients within the ﬁrst year but is rarely fatal. Posttransplant lymphoproliferativedisorder is a B cell lymphoma associated with the Epstein-Barr virus and is related to the degreeof immunosuppression. It is a rare complication of transplant. Bronchiolitis obliterans syn-drome denotes chronic rejection and is the leading cause of late mortality in lung transplant.
VI-59. The answer is D.   (Chap. 252)   This patient presents with a lung abscess in the setting of
pneumonia. Lung abscess is deﬁned as a pulmonary cavitation caused by infection. Aspi-ration is the predominant means of acquiring infection. The most common anatomic sitesof aspiration (when people are lying on their back) and therefore lung abscess include thesuperior segment of the right lower lobe, posterior segment of the right upper lobe, andsuperior segment of the left lower lobe. Anaerobic bacteria are the most prevalent isolatesfrom lung abscesses, as these are the most common bacteria aspirated from the mouth. Al-coholism is a known risk factor for aspiration. Necrotizing aerobic bacteria such as Staph-
ylococcus aureus ,Klebsiella pneumoniae , and Nocardia  can cause lung abscesses but do so
with much less frequency than do anaerobic bacteria. Peptostreptococcus , an anaerobic or-
ganism that is part of normal mouth ﬂora, has been shown to be the most common or-ganism isolated from lung abscesses. Polymicrobial culture results are not uncommon.Management includes antibiotics aimed at treating anaerobes, such as clindamycin.
VI-60. The answer is C.   (Chap. 28)   This patient complains of symptoms that are consistent
with restless legs syndrome (RLS). This disorder affects 1–5% of young to middle-aged indi-viduals and as many as 20% of older individuals. The symptoms of restless legs syndromeare a nonspeciﬁc uncomfortable sensation in the legs that begin during periods of quies-cence and are alleviated with movement. Patients frequently ﬁnd it difﬁcult to describe theirsymptoms, but usually describe the sensation as deep within the affected limb. Rarely is thesensation described as distinctly painful unless an underlying neuropathy is also present.The severity of the disorder tends to wax and wane over time and tends to worsen with sleepdeprivation, caffeine intake, pregnancy, and alcohol. Renal disease, neuropathy, and iron de-ﬁciency are known secondary cause of RLS symptoms. In this patient, correcting the irondeﬁciency is the best choice for initial therapy as this may entirely relieve the symptoms ofRLS. For individuals with primary RLS (not related to another medical condition), the do-paminergic agents are the treatment of choice. Pramipexole or ropinirole are recommendedas ﬁrst-line treatment. While carbidopa/levodopa is highly effective, individuals have a highrisk of developing augmented symptoms over time, with increasingly higher doses neededto control the symptoms. Other options for treating RLS include narcotics, benzodiaze-pines, and gabapentin. Hormone replacement therapy has no role in the treatment of RLS.
VI-61. The answer is C.   (Chap. 253)   This patient has a history suggestive of cystic ﬁbrosis,
with the exception of her age. The persistent asthma, airﬂow obstruction, and sputumcultures growing P. aeruginosa and S. aureus coupled with bilateral upper lobe inﬁltrates
should prompt further investigation for this disease. The diagnosis of cystic ﬁbrosis isbased on clinical criteria plus laboratory evidence. The laboratory test of choice remainsanalysis of sweat chloride values. Patients with mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmem-brane regulator (CFTR) will have increased amounts of chloride in their sweat, and achloride value over 70 meq/L will generally be found. Approximately 1 to 2% of patientswith cystic ﬁbrosis will have normal results of sweat chloride testing, and in these casesthe nasal transepithelial potential difference has been used for diagnosis. While the∆F508 mutation accounts for the majority of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis, more than 1000other mutations that can cause this disorder have been described. Thus, the absence ofthis mutation does not rule out cystic ﬁbrosis. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsyprobably will show bronchiectasis and chronic airway inﬂammation but will not be diag-nostic. Similar ﬁndings probably will be found on a chest CT but are not diagnostic.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 271
VI-62. The answer is A.   (Chap. 158)   This patient has evidence of recent tuberculosis infection
with the change from a negative to a positive PPD. A chest radiogram should be per-
formed to rule out active disease and the presence of latent disease. If there is no abnor-mality, isoniazid should be prescribed to prevent subsequent development of activedisease. The optimal duration of therapy is 6 to 12 months, with most recommending 9months to achieve maximal protection from active disease. The major complication of thistherapy is hepatitis. Isoniazid should not be given to patients with active liver disease. Allthese patients should be educated about the signs or symptoms of hepatitis and should beinstructed to discontinue the medication if those symptoms develop. Patients should bequestioned about symptoms monthly. Baseline liver function tests need be obtained onlyin patients with a history of liver disease or daily alcohol use. Serial measurement of liverfunction is not necessary in the absence of a history of liver disease or alcohol use.
VI-63. The answer is B.   (Chap. 245)   This patient presents with subacute-onset dyspnea and an
examination consistent with pleural effusion. Dullness to percussion can be seen withconsolidation, atelectasis, and pleural effusion. With consolidation, voice transmission isincreased during expiration so that one may hear whispered pectoriloquy or egophony.However, in both pleural effusion and atelectasis, breath sounds are diminished and thereis no augmentation of voice transmission. Although this patient could have either atelecta-sis or pleural effusion, the lack of tracheal deviation points to pleural effusion. Atelectasiswould have to be of many segments to account for these ﬁndings, and such signiﬁcant air-way collapse would generally cause ipsilateral tracheal deviation. The clinician would ex-pect to ﬁnd pleural effusion on chest ﬁlm, and the most appropriate next managementstep would be thoracentesis to aid in the diagnosis of the etiology and for symptomatic re-lief. With a lack of symptoms to suggest infection, antibiotics are not indicated. Similarly,in the absence of wheezing or signiﬁcant sputum production, bronchodilators and deepsuctioning are unlikely to be helpful. Bronchoscopy may be indicated ultimately in themanagement of this patient, particularly if malignancy is suspected; however, the most ap-propriate ﬁrst attempt at diagnosis is by means of thoracentesis.
VI-64. The answer is F .   (Chap. 31)   Many experts suggest treatment for acute sinusitis if symp-
toms are severe and duration of illness is >7 days. However, even among patients whomeet this criterion, only 40–50% are shown to have bacterial sinusitis. Y et, there is actu-ally little way other than unduly invasive sinus aspiration to differentiate viral from bacte-rial sinusitis. CT has no value whatsoever in the workup of acute sinusitis but may beuseful for chronic sinusitis where anatomic disease might be implicated in recurrent orpersistent infection. Nasal culture is likely to pick up commensal bacterial ﬂora and willnot be representative of the ﬂora seen in the anatomically sequestered sinus. Immuno-compromised patients represent a distinct subset because of their predilection for fungalsinusitis. These patients should receive early otolaryngologic evaluation.
VI-65. The answer is A.   (Chap. 260)   Lung transplantation has been successfully utilized in the
treatment of end-stage lung disease since the early 1990s. Currently, ~1700 lung trans-plants are performed yearly worldwide. The most common reason for lung transplant isCOPD, accounting for 38.5% of all lung transplants performed between 1995 and 2004.In addition, another 8.6% of lung transplants were performed because of emphysemadue to α
1 antitrypsin deﬁciency. IPF and cystic ﬁbrosis are the second and third most
common reasons for lung transplantation, respectively. Pulmonary hypertension andsarcoidosis each account for <5% of all lung transplants. Single lung transplantation is anoption for patients with COPD, IPF, and sarcoidosis. Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis and pul-monary hypertension receive double lung transplants.
VI-66. The answer is D.   [Chap. 251; LA Mandell et al: Clin Infect Dis 44(Suppl 2):S27, 2007]
The Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American Thoracic Society state thatin the proper clinical context, a new inﬁltrate on chest imaging should be present to diag-nose community acquired pneumonia (CAP). An accurate history is important becausethe differential diagnosis of CAP includes heart disease, chronic bronchitis, pulmonaryembolism, and acute bronchitis. At least two clinical symptoms consistent with acute
272 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
pulmonary infection (any combination of fever, cough, chest pain, or dyspnea) should be
present for diagnosis. Cough is the most common symptom in patients presenting withCAP . Physical ﬁndings have a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 60–70%, and therefore radiol-ogy is recommended to make the diagnosis. Similarly, laboratory studies including WBCcount and measures of inﬂammation are neither sensitive nor speciﬁc enough to make adiagnosis. Antibiotics are not recommended for acute bronchitis. In some cases, follow-up radiograph or empirical therapy for CAP should be considered if clinical suspicion ishigh and the original chest x-ray is negative. The microbiologic basis of CAP can usuallynot be deﬁnitively determined on a clinical and radiographic basis. Except for the smallminority of patients who are admitted to the intensive care unit, no data exist to showthat speciﬁc pathogen-directed therapy is superior to empirical therapy. Microbiologicdata are not components of the clinical diagnosis of CAP .
VI-67. The answer is A.   (Chap. 246)   Spirometry does not measure total lung capacity because
it cannot account for residual volume. The most frequently used and accurate measuresof lung volumes are steady-state helium dilution lung volumes and body plethysmogra-phy. In helium dilution the patient inspires a known concentration of helium from aclosed circuit of known volume. After the patient rebreathes in the closed circuit for a pe-riod of time, the concentration of helium equilibrates, and subsequently the lung vol-umes can be calculated by using Avogadro’s law. This calculation assumes that gas in thecircuit will rapidly equilibrate with the ventilated portions of the lung. However, if thereare slowly emptying areas of the lung, as in cystic ﬁbrosis patients, or parts of the lungthat do not participate in gas exchange at all, as in bullous emphysema patients, heliumdilution will underestimate true lung volumes. Subsequently, body plethysmography isthe preferred method for lung volume measurement in these disease states. T o performbody plethysmography, the patient sits in a sealed box and pants against a closed mouth-piece. Panting results in changes in the pressure of the box that, when compared withchanges at the mouthpiece, can be used to calculate lung volumes. This method measurestotal thoracic gas volume and is more accurate than helium dilution. Helium lung vol-umes are easier to perform for patients and staff and give reliable results in most circum-stances. Many centers measure a single-breath helium dilution lung volume whenmeasuring the diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide, which has the same or greater lim-itations as the rebreathing method. Transdiaphragmatic pressure is used to measure res-piratory muscle strength, not lung volumes.
VI-68. The answer is E.   (Chap. 126)   Patients with lung transplants have the highest risk of
pneumonia among all recipients of solid organ transplants. The pathogens causing pul-monary infections vary with the time after transplantation. The most common pathogensin the ﬁrst 2 weeks (early period) after surgery are the gram-negative bacteria, particularlyEnterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus, Aspergillus, and Candida. Between 1
and 6 months (middle period), most infections are due to either primary activation or re-activation of CMV . CMV pneumonia is often difﬁcult to distinguish from acute transplantrejection. More than 6 months after a transplant (late period), the chronic suppression ofcell-mediated immunity places patients at risk of infection from Pneumocystis, Nocardia,
Listeria, other fungi, and intracellular pathogens. Pretransplant lung donor cultures often
guide posttransplant empirical antibiotic choices. Prophylaxis against CMV in seroposi-tive donors or recipients and Pneumocystis is routine after lung transplantation.
VI-69. The answer is A.   (Chap. 28)   Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder characterized by excessive
sleepiness with intrusion of rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep into wakefulness. Narco-lepsy affects ~1 in 4000 individuals in the United States with a genetic predisposition. Re-cent research has demonstrated that narcolepsy is associated with low or undetectablelevels of the neurotransmitter hypocretin (orexin) in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid. This neu-rotransmitter is released from a small number of neurons in the hypothalamus. Given theassociation of narcolepsy with the MHC antigen HLA DQB1*0602, it is thought that nar-colepsy is an autoimmune process that leads to destruction of the hypocretin-secretingneurons in the hypothalamus. The classic symptom tetrad of narcolepsy is: (1) cataplexy;
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 273
(2) hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations; (3) sleep paralysis; and (4) excessive day-
time somnolence. Of these symptoms, cataplexy is the most speciﬁc for the diagnosis ofnarcolepsy. Cataplexy refers to the sudden loss of muscle tone in response to strong emo-tions. It most commonly occurs with laughter or surprise but may be associated with angeras well. Cataplexy can have a wide range of symptoms, from mild sagging of the jaw lastingfor a few seconds to a complete loss of muscle tone lasting several minutes. During thistime, individuals are aware of their surroundings and are not unconscious. This symptomis present in 76% of individuals diagnosed with narcolepsy and is the most speciﬁc ﬁndingfor the diagnosis. Hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations and sleep paralysis can oc-cur from anything that causes chronic sleep deprivation, including sleep apnea and chronicinsufﬁcient sleep. Excessive daytime somnolence is present in 100% of individuals withnarcolepsy but is not speciﬁc for the diagnosis as this symptom may be present with anysleep disorder as well as with chronic insufﬁcient sleep. The presence of two or more REMperiods occurring during a daytime multiple sleep latency test is suggestive but not diag-nostic of narcolepsy. Other disorders that may lead to presence of REM during short day-time nap periods include sleep apnea, sleep phase delay syndrome, and insufﬁcient sleep.
VI-70. The answer is B.   (Chap. 28; http://www.sleepfoundation.org/site/c.huIXKjM0IxF/b.2417355/
k.143E/2002_Sleep_in_America_Poll.htm, accessed December 27, 2007)   Insomnia is the most
common sleep disorder in the population. In the 2002 Sleep in America Poll, 58% of re-spondents reported at least one symptom of insomnia on a weekly basis, and a third ofindividuals experience these symptoms on a nightly basis. Insomnia is deﬁned clinicallyas the inability to fall asleep or stay asleep, which leads to daytime sleepiness or poor day-time function. These symptoms occur despite adequate time and opportunity for sleep.Obstructive sleep apnea is thought to affect as many as 10–15% of the population and iscurrently underdiagnosed in the United States. In addition, because of the rising inci-dence of obesity, obstructive sleep apnea is also expected to increase in incidence over thecoming years. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when there is ongoing effort to inspireagainst an occluded oropharynx during sleep. It is directly related to obesity and also hasan increased incidence in men and in older populations. Narcolepsy affects 1 in 4000people and is due to a deﬁcit of hypocretin (orexin) in the brain. Symptoms of narcolepsyinclude sudden loss of tone in response to emotional stimuli (cataplexy), hypersomnia,sleep paralysis, and hallucinations with sleep onset and waking. Physiologically, there isintrusion or persistence of rapid-eye-movement sleep during wakefulness that accountsfor the classic symptoms of narcolepsy. Restless legs syndrome is estimated to affect 1–5%of young to middle-aged adults and as many as 10–20% of the elderly. Restless legs syn-drome is marked by uncomfortable sensations in the legs that are difﬁcult to describe.The symptoms have an onset with quiescence, especially at night, and are relieved withmovement. Delayed sleep phase syndrome is a circadian rhythm disorder that commonlypresents with a complaint of insomnia and accounts for as much as 10% of individualsreferred to the sleep clinic for evaluation of insomnia. In delayed sleep phase syndrome,the intrinsic circadian rhythm is delayed such that sleep onset occurs much later thannormal. When allowed to sleep according to the intrinsic circadian rhythm, individualswith delayed sleep phase syndrome sleep normally and do not experience excessive som-nolence. This disorder is most common in adolescence and young adulthood.
VI-71. The answer is B.   (Chap. 258)   The physiologic effects of hypoventilation are typically
magniﬁed during sleep because of a further reduction in central respiratory drive. Hyper-capnia causes cerebral vasodilation, which manifests as headache upon wakening. Theheadache typically resolves soon after awakening as the Pa
CO2 decreases with increased
ventilation and cerebral vascular tone returns to normal. Patients with frequent arousalsfrom sleep and hypoventilation commonly complain of daytime somnolence and mayalso exhibit confusion and fatigue. Hypoventilation causes an increase in Pa
CO2 and an
obligatory fall in P AO2. The hypoxemia can stimulate erythropoiesis and result in polycy-
themia. With central hypoventilation disorders, patients may also have impaired cranialnerve reﬂexes or muscular function, causing aspiration.
274 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-72. The answer is C.   (Chap. 28)   Parasomnias are abnormal behaviors or experiences
that arise from stages 3 and 4 sleep. Also known as confusional arousals, the electro-
encephalogram during a parasomnia event frequently shows persistence of slow-wave(delta) sleep into arousal. Non-REM (NREM) parasomnias may also include morecomplex behavior, including eating and sexual activity. Treatment of NREM para-somnias is usually not indicated, and a safe environment should be assured for thepatient. In cases where injury is likely to occur, treatment with a drug that decreasesslow-wave sleep will treat the parasomnia. Typical treatment is a benzodiazepine.There are no typical parasomnias that arise from stage I or stage II sleep. REM para-somnias include nightmare disorder and REM-behavior disorder. REM-behavior dis-order is increasingly recognized as associated with Parkinson’s disease and otherParkinsonian syndrome. This disorder is characterized by lack of decreased muscletone in REM sleep, which leads to the acting out of dreams, sometimes resulting inviolence and injury.
VI-73. The answer is E.   (Chap. 250)   Passive cigarette smoking, or secondhand smoking, has
been associated in the last 15 years with many adverse outcomes. A correlation has beendemonstrated between the number of smokers in a house and the concentration of respi-rable particulate load. Furthermore, meta-analyses of the best data have shown that per-sons who receive passive cigarette smoke have a 25% increase in mortality associated withlung cancer, respiratory illness, and cardiac disease compared with persons without suchan exposure. Children with smoking parents have been shown to have an increased prev-alence of respiratory illness and decreased lung function compared with nonexposedchildren.
VI-74. The answer is C.   (Chap. 265)   The annual incidence of sepsis has increased to
>700,000 individuals yearly in the United States, and sepsis accounts for >200,000deaths yearly. Approximately two-thirds of the cases of sepsis occur in individualswith other signiﬁcant comorbidities, and the incidence of sepsis increases with ageand preexisting comorbidities. In addition, the incidence of sepsis is thought to be in-creasing as a result of several other factors. These include increased longevity of indi-viduals with chronic disease, including AIDS, and increased risk for sepsis inindividuals with AIDS. The practice of medicine has also inﬂuenced the risk of sepsis,with an increased risk of sepsis related to the increased use of antimicrobial drugs,immunosuppressive agents, mechanical ventilation, and indwelling catheters andother hardware.
VI-75.  and.  VI-76.  The answers are A and B.   (Chap. 251)   The ﬁrst patient is a candidate for out-
patient therapy because of his CURB-65 score of 0. As shown below, an oral macrolide(azithromycin, clarithromycin) is the best choice. Respiratory ﬂuoroquinolones may beused in the presence of comorbidities or recent antibiotics. The second patient has aCURB-65 score of 3 (age, respiratory rate, BUN) and merits consideration for inpatienttherapy. Of the listed choices, a 
β-lactam (ceftriaxone) plus a macrolide (clarithromycin)
is best. A respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone may also be used as a single agent unless the pa-tient goes to the intensive care unit, when a 
β-lactam should also be used. Fluconazole
does not have a role for community-acquired pneumonia (CAP); it is used to treat can-didal infections. Piperacillin/tazobactam is a consideration when Pseudomonas  infection
is considered likely, such as in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or bronchiectasis. Vancomycinis only a consideration for CAP when epidemiologic considerations make methicillin-re-sistant Staphylococcus aureus  a likely pathogen.
VI-77. The answer is A.   (Chap. 263)   Patients initiated on mechanical ventilation require a vari-
ety of supportive measures. Sedation and analgesia with a combination of benzodiazepinesand narcotics are commonly used to maintain patient comfort and safety while mechani-cally ventilated. In addition, patients are immobilized and are thus at high risk for de-
velopment of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolus. Prophylaxis withunfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin SC should be administered. Pro-phylaxis against diffuse gastrointestinal mucosal injury is also indicated, particularly in in-
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 275
dividuals with neurologic insult or those with severe respiratory failure and adult
respiratory distress syndrome. Gastric acid suppression can be managed with H 2-receptor
antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and carafate. It is also recommended that individualswho are expected to be intubated for >72 hours receive nutritional support. Prokineticagents are often required. A ﬁnal supportive measure that should be instituted in all inten-sive care units is to maintain a protocol that includes frequent positional changes and sur-veillance for prevention of decubitus ulcers. In the past, frequent ventilator circuit changeshad been studied as a measure for prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia, but theywere ineffective and may even have increased the risk of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
VI-78. The answer is B.   (Chap. 265; RP Dellinger et al: Crit Care Med 32: 858, 2004)   Sepsis is a
systemic inﬂammatory response that develops in response to a microbial source. T o diagnosethe systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS), a patient should have two or more ofthe following conditions: (1) fever or hypothermia; (2) tachypnea; (3) tachycardia; or (4) leu-kocytosis, leukopenia, or >10% band forms. This patient fulﬁlls the criteria for sepsis with sep-tic shock as she meets the above criteria for SIRS with the presence of organ dysfunction andongoing hypotension despite ﬂuid resuscitation. The patient has received 2 L of IV colloid andnow has a central venous pressure of 18 cmH
2O. Ongoing large-volume ﬂuid administration
may result in pulmonary edema as the central venous pressure is quite high. At this point, ﬂuidadministration should continue, but at a lower infusion rate. In this patient, who is receivingchronic glucocorticoids for an underlying inﬂammatory condition, stress-dose steroids shouldbe administered because adrenal suppression will prevent the patient from developing thenormal stress response in the face of SIRS. Glucocorticoids may be given while waiting for re-sults of the cosyntropin stimulation test. If the patient fails to respond to glucocorticoids, sheshould be started on vasopressor therapy. A single small study has suggested that norepineph-rine may be preferred over dopamine for septic shock, but these data have not been conﬁrmedin other trials. The “Surviving Sepsis” guidelines state that either norepinephrine or dopamineshould be considered as ﬁrst-line agent for the treatment of septic shock. Transfusion of redblood cells in the critically ill has been associated with a higher risk for development of acutelung injury, sepsis, and death. A threshold hemoglobin value of 7 g/dL has been shown to be assafe as a value of 10 g/dL and is associated with fewer complications. In this patient, a bloodtransfusion is not currently indicated, but may be considered if the central venous oxygen sat-uration is <70% in order to improve oxygen delivery to tissues. An alternative to blood trans-fusion in this setting is the use of dobutamine to improve cardiac output.
VI-79. The answer is D.   (Chap. 265)   Sepsis is responsible for >200,000 deaths yearly in the
United States, and the incidence of sepsis has been increasing over the past 20 years. Approx-imately two-thirds of patients have underlying comorbidities, and the incidence of sepsis in-creases markedly with age. Pathophysiologically, sepsis occurs as a result of the inﬂammatoryreaction that develops in response to an infection. Microbial invasion of the bloodstream isnot necessary for the development of severe sepsis. In fact, blood cultures are positive in only20–40% of cases of severe sepsis and in only 40–70% of septic shock. The systemic responseto infection classically has been demonstrated by the response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS),which is also called endotoxin. LPS binds to receptors on the surfaces of monocytes, macro-phages, and neutrophils, causing activation of these cells to produce a variety of inﬂamma-tory mediators including tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α ). This process ampliﬁes the LPS
signal, stimulating a process of inﬂammation that leads to complement activation, increasein procoagulant factors, and cellular injury. The end result of this systemic inﬂammatoryprocess is widespread intravascular thrombosis. This process is meant to wall off invadingmicroorganisms to prevent infection from spreading to other tissues, but in cases of severesepsis, this leads to tissue hypoxia and ongoing cellular injury. In addition, systemic hypoten-sion develops as a reaction to inﬂammatory mediators and occurs despite increased levels ofplasma catecholamines. Physiologically, this is manifested as a marked decrease in systemicvascular resistance despite evidence of increased sympathetic activation. Survival in sepsishas improved in the past decades largely due to advances in supportive care in the intensivecare unit. Activated protein C is the only medication currently approved for treatment ofsepsis and has been demonstrated to cause a 33% relative risk mortality reduction.
276 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-80. The answer is D.   (Chap. 263)   Mechanical ventilation is frequently used to support ven-
tilation in individuals with both hypoxemic and hypercarbic respiratory failure. Mechan-
ical ventilators provide warm, humidiﬁed gas to the airways in accordance with presetventilator settings. The ventilator serves as the energy source for inspiration, whereas ex-piration is a passive process, driven by the elastic recoil of the lungs and chest wall. Posi-tive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) may be used to prevent alveolar collapse onexpiration. The physiologic consequences of PEEP include decreased preload and de-creased afterload. Decreased preload occurs because PEEP decreases venous return to theright atrium and may manifest as hypotension, especially in an individual who is vol-ume-depleted. In addition, PEEP is transmitted to the heart and great vessels. This com-plicated interaction leads to a decrease in afterload and may be beneﬁcial to individualswith depressed cardiac function. When utilizing mechanical ventilation, the physicianshould also be cognizant of other potential physiologic consequences of the ventilatorsettings. Initial settings chosen by the physician include mode of ventilation, respiratoryrate, fraction of inspired oxygen, and tidal volume, if volume-cycled ventilation is used,or maximum pressure, if pressure-cycled ventilation is chosen. The respiratory therapistalso has the ability to alter the inspiratory ﬂow rate and waveform for delivery of the cho-sen mode of ventilation. These choices can have important physiologic consequences forthe patient. In individuals with obstructive lung disease, it is important to maximize thetime for exhalation. This can be done by decreasing the respiratory rate or decreasing theinspiratory time (increase the I:E ratio, prolong expiration), which is accomplished by in-creasing the inspiratory ﬂow rate. Care must also be taken in choosing the inspired tidalvolume in volume-cycled ventilatory modes as high inspired tidal volumes can contrib-ute to development of acute lung injury due to overdistention of alveoli.
VI-81. The answer is B.   (Chap. 263)   Patients intubated for respiratory failure due to obstruc-
tive lung disease (asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) are at risk for the de-velopment of intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure (auto-PEEP). Because theseconditions are characterized by expiratory ﬂow limitation, a long expiratory time is re-quired to allow a full exhalation. If the patient is unable to exhale fully, auto-PEEP devel-ops. With repeated breaths, the pressure generated from auto-PEEP continues to rise andimpedes venous return to the right ventricle. This results in hypotension and also in-creases the risk for pneumothorax. Both of these conditions should be considered whenevaluating this patient. However, because breath sounds are heard bilaterally, pneumo-thorax is less likely, and tube thoracostomy is not indicated at this time. Development ofauto-PEEP has most likely occurred in this patient because the patient is currently agi-tated and hyperventilating as the effects of the paralytic agent wear off. In AC mode ven-tilation, each respiratory effort will deliver the full tidal volume of 550 mL and there is adecreased time for exhalation allowing auto-PEEP to occur. Immediate management ofthis patient should include disconnecting the patient from the ventilator to allow the pa-tient to fully exhale and decrease the auto-PEEP . A ﬂuid bolus may temporarily increasethe blood pressure but would not eliminate the underlying cause of the hypotension. Af-ter treatment of the auto-PEEP by disconnecting the patient from the ventilator, sedationis important to prevent further occurrence of auto-PEEP by decreasing the respiratoryrate to the set rate of the ventilator. Sedation can be accomplished with a combination ofbenzodiazepines and narcotics or propofol. Initiation of vasopressor support is not indi-cated, unless other measures fail to treat the hypotension and it is suspected that sepsis isthe cause of hypotension.
VI-82. The answer is E.   (Chap. 259)   Obstructive sleep apnea is deﬁned by excessive daytime
sleepiness and at least ﬁve obstructed breathing events (hypopnea or apnea) per hour ofsleep. Apneic events are pauses in breathing that last ≥10 s. Hypopneic events occur when
ventilation is reduced by 50% for ≥10 s. It should be stressed that there are two compo-
nents to diagnosis: symptoms of daytime sleepiness combined with obstructive breathingwhile asleep. Patients with disordered breathing at night who are asymptomatic whileawake do not have  OSA. The central pathogenesis of sleep apnea is pharyngeal narrowing
that leads to airway obstruction when somnolent. Risk factors include male gender, obe-
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 277
sity, and a shortened mandible or maxilla. It remains unclear whether smoking is an in-
dependent risk factor. The disorder is twice as common in men as in women. About 50%of patients with OSA have a BMI of >30 kg/m
2. There appears to be an association be-
tween diabetes mellitus and OSA that is independent of obesity. Insulin resistance hasbeen shown to be related to increasing frequency of apneas and hypopneas. Based on hisother cardiac risk factors, including smoking, obesity, and hypertension, as well as hisnew diagnosis of OSA, this patient should be screened for diabetes mellitus.
VI-83. The answer is D.   (Chap. 389; RL Lange: N Engl J Med 345:351, 2001.)   Cocaine overdose
is a potentially lethal condition that should be managed in the intensive care unit setting.These patients are in a hyperadrenergic state characterized by hypertension, tachycardia,tonic-clonic seizures, dyspnea and ventricular arrhythmias. Ventricular arrhythmias havebeen managed with IV nonselective beta-receptor blockers such as propranolol. There isconcern with giving beta-blockers in patients with cocaine-induced chest pain or myocar-dial ischemia because of the potential for unopposed alpha activity provoking coronaryvasospasm. Calcium channel blockers are often used in patients with cocaine intoxicationand potential coronary ischemia to avoid this effect. T onic-clonic seizures have been man-aged with IV diazepam infusions, but it would not beneﬁt the ventricular ectopy. Hy-dralazine may manage the hypertension but would have no effect on the ventriculararrhythmia and might cause a reﬂex tachycardia. Cardioversion is not indicated for thispatient who is in nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Also, without addressing the un-derlying disorder prompting the arrhythmia (i.e., increased norepinephrine in the pre-synaptic space), the tachycardia is likely to recur. Norepinephrine would becontraindicated as it would exacerbate the hyperadrenergic state.
VI-84. The answer is D.   (Chap. 255)   Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis, respiratory bronchi-
olitis–interstitial lung disease, pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis, Goodpasture’s disease,and pulmonary alveolar proteinosis are almost always associated with cigarette smoking. Inaddition, 67 to 75% of patients with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis also have a history of ciga-rette use. Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), or cryptogenic organizingpneumonia, is often an idiopathic syndrome that presents in the ﬁfth to sixth decade of lifewith dyspnea on exertion, cough, fevers, malaise, and weight loss. The cause in most instancesis unknown, although BOOP may occur concomitantly with primary pulmonary disorders asa nonspeciﬁc reaction to lung injury. BOOP usually responds to steroid therapy, which in-duces clinical recovery in two-thirds of patients. It is not associated with previous tobacco use.
VI-85. The answer is D.   (Chap. 250)   The patient presents with acute-onset pulmonary symp-
toms, including wheezing, with no other medical problems. He is a farmer and was re-cently handling hay. The clinical presentation and radiogram are consistent with farmer’slung, a hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by Actinomyces. In this disorder moldy hay
with spores of actinomycetes are inhaled and produce a hypersensitivity pneumonitis.The disorder is seen most commonly in rainy periods, when the spores multiply. Patientspresent generally 4 to 8 h after exposure with fever, cough, and shortness of breath with-out wheezing. Chest radiograms often show patchy bilateral, often upper lobe inﬁltrates.The exposure history will differentiate this disorder from other types of pneumonia.
VI-86. The answer is E.   (Chap. 255)   This patient with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is presenting
with pulmonary symptoms, and the biopsy shows a pattern of cryptogenic organizingpneumonia (COP), a known pulmonary manifestation of rheumatoid arthritis. COP (for-merly bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia, BOOP) usually presents in the ﬁfthor sixth decades with a ﬂulike illness. Symptoms include fevers, malaise, weight loss, cough,and dyspnea. Inspiratory crackles are common, and late inspiratory squeaks may also beheard. Pulmonary function testing reveals restrictive lung disease. The typical pattern onhigh-resolution chest CT is patchy areas of airspace consolidation, nodular opacities, andground-glass opacities that occur more frequently in the lower lung zones. Pathology showsthe presence of granulation tissue plugging airways, alveolar ducts, and alveoli. There is fre-quently chronic inﬂammation in the alveolar interstitium. Treatment with high-dose ster-oids is effective in two-thirds of individuals, with most individuals being able to be tapered
278 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
to lower doses over the ﬁrst year. Azathioprine is an immunosuppressive therapy that is
commonly used in interstitial lung disease due to usual interstitial pneumonitis. While itmay be considered in COP unresponsive to glucocorticoids, it would not be a ﬁrst-line agentused without concomitant steroid therapy. RA has multiple pulmonary complications.However, therapy with inﬂiximab or methotrexate, which are useful for severe RA, are notused in the treatment of COP . Methotrexate also has pulmonary side effects and may causepulmonary ﬁbrosis. Hydroxychloroquine is frequently useful for joint symptoms in autoim-mune disorders. Its major side effect is retinal toxicity, and it is not known to cause COP .
VI-87. The answer is A.   (Chap. 258)   Disorders of the respiratory drive, respiratory muscular sys-
tem, some chest wall disorders and upper airways obstruction may produce an elevated Pa
CO2
despite having normal pulmonary function. In this setting, the alveolar-arterial ( A – a) oxygen
gradient will be normal but the minute ventilation is low, producing a respiratory acidosis. Inpulmonary parenchymal or airways diseases associated with respiratory acidosis (pulmonaryﬁbrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), the Pa
CO2 is elevated, the A – a gradient is
commonly increased, and minute ventilation is either elevated or normal. Any cause of respira-tory acidosis may produce an obligatory fall in Pa
O2. Diaphragmatic dysfunction and maximal
inspiratory or expiratory pressures are commonly impaired with respiratory neuromusculardysfunction but may be normal in other disorders of central hypoventilation such as stroke.
VI-88. The answer is C.   (Chap. 257)   Severe kyphoscoliosis causes pulmonary symptoms in up
to 3% of patients with this condition. The physical abnormalities caused by the forwardand lateral curvature of the spine result in abnormal pulmonary mechanics. This is man-ifested primarily as restrictive lung disease with chronic alveolar hypoventilation. This inturn leads to ventilation-perfusion imbalances that result in hypoxic vasoconstrictionand may cause the eventual development of pulmonary hypertension.
VI-89. The answer is C.   (Chap. 194)   This patient lives in a part of the country where Blastomy-
ces infection is found. Other endemic regions in North America are the Mississippi and
Ohio River basins, the Great Lake states, and areas along the St. Lawrence River. The sub-acute course after an abrupt onset, arthralgias, and alveolar inﬁltrates with a cavity are allsuggestive of Blastomyces  infection, given the region from which the patient originates.
Pleural effusions and mediastinal adenopathy are uncommon. Respiratory failure and dis-seminated infection are more common in immunocompromised patients who may have amortality of >50%. Legionella  pneumonia may present in a similar fashion, but those pa-
tients usually have a predisposing condition such as diabetes, advanced age, end-stage renaldisease, immunosuppression, or advanced lung disease. Hyponatremia may be seen in Le-
gionella  pneumonia but is more common in Legionnaire’s disease. Although a bone mar-
row aspirate may grow Blastomyces , isolation from more accessible material (i.e., sputum,
pus) usually makes bone marrow aspiration unnecessary. The KOH stain of expectoratedsputum is positive in >80% of cases of Blastomyces  pneumonia. The Quellung reaction is
used to diagnose infection with Streptococcus pneumoniae . However, the time course of this
infection is prolonged for pneumococcal pneumonia, and necrotizing infection causingcavitation is rare. The time course of the infection is too rapid for pulmonary tuberculosis,although tuberculosis should be considered in the evaluation of cavitary lesions of the lung.
VI-90. The answer is B.   (Chap. 255)   This patient’s clinical-radiologic presentation, in addition
to the lung function information, which revealed a moderate restrictive defect and a mod-erate gas transfer defect, suggests an acute pneumonitis. The differential diagnosis in-cludes various causes of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, idiopathic bronchiolitis obliteransorganizing pneumonia, acute eosinophilic pneumonia, interstitial lung disease secondaryto connective tissue disorders [systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis,polymyositis], and diffuse alveolar damage secondary to other causes (sepsis, drugs, tox-ins, infections, etc.). Methotrexate has been associated with an idiosyncratic drug reaction,with particular risk in the elderly and in patients with decreased creatinine clearance. Dis-continuing the medicine and in some cases adding high-dose steroids constitute the initialmanagement. Initiating empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics until a more deﬁnite resultcould be obtained via a bronchoscopy would be a reasonable approach.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 279
VI-91. The answer is A.   (Chap. 263)   T o obtain a stable airway for invasive mechanical ventila-
tion, patients must safely undergo endotracheal intubation. In most patients, paralytic
agents are used in combination with sedatives to accomplish endotracheal intubation. Succi-nylcholine is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent with a short half-life and is one ofthe most commonly used paralytic agents. However, because it depolarizes the neuromuscu-lar junction, succinylcholine cannot be used in individuals with hyperkalemia because thedrug may cause further increases in the potassium level and potentially fatal cardiac arrhyth-mias. Some conditions in which it is relatively contraindicated to use succinylcholine be-cause of the risk of hyperkalemia include acute renal failure, crush injuries, musculardystrophy, rhabdomyolysis, and tumor lysis syndrome. Acetaminophen overdose is not acontraindication to the use of succinylcholine unless concomitant renal failure is present.
VI-92. The answer is E.   [Chap. 257; Arch Neurol 58(6):893–898, 2001.]   Patients with Guillain-
Barré syndrome (acute inﬂammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy) are at high risk of de-veloping respiratory failure, with up to 30% requiring mechanical ventilation during thecourse of their illness. Patients with this syndrome should be hospitalized and followed forevidence of respiratory failure. The most common means of doing this is serial measure-ments of vital capacity and maximum inspiratory pressure. Once the vital capacity hasfallen to less than 20 mL/kg body weight, mechanical ventilation is indicated. Other mea-sures of impending ventilatory failure include a maximum inspiratory pressure less than 30cmH
2O and a maximum expiratory pressure less than 40 cmH 2O. Although rising Pa CO2
provides clear evidence of ventilatory failure and is an indication for the initiation of me-chanical ventilation, ideally these other measures will identify these individuals beforetheir progression to overt ventilatory failure.
VI-93. The answer is E.   (Chap. 322)   Sarcoidosis is an inﬂammatory disorder of unknown
cause that is characterized by the presence of noncaseating granulomas. The worldwideprevalence of sarcoidosis is estimated to be 20–60 per 100,000 population. The highestincidence occurs in the Nordic population, but in the United States, the incidence of sar-coidosis is highest in African Americans. Sarcoidosis typically occurs in young, otherwise-healthy adults. Up to 20% of cases can be found incidentally on chest radiograph inasymptomatic individuals, as in this case presentation. When present, typical symptomsare most commonly cough and dyspnea. However, sarcoidosis can affect any organ sys-tem. After the respiratory symptoms, skin disease and ocular ﬁndings are the most com-monly seen manifestations of sarcoidosis. Lung involvement is seen in >90% ofindividuals with sarcoidosis, and staging of pulmonary sarcoidosis is based upon ﬁndingson chest radiograph. Stage I disease refers to patients with hilar adenopathy only. In stageII disease, hilar adenopathy is present with pulmonary inﬁltrates. Stage III disease has noevidence of hilar adenopathy, but interstitial pulmonary disease is present; stage IV dis-ease consists of pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Occasionally, the term stage 0 disease  is used to refer
to individuals with extrapulmonary sarcoidosis and no lung involvement. Deﬁnitive diag-nosis of sarcoidosis relies upon demonstration of noncaseating granulomas on biopsy ofaffected tissue without other cause for granulomatous disease. In this case, transbronchialneedle aspiration of a hilar lymph node demonstrated noncaseating granulomas, as didtransbronchial tissue biopsies. Even without overt involvement of lung parenchyma,granulomas are frequently found on transbronchial tissue biopsies. Treatment of sarcoi-dosis is largely based upon symptoms. In this patient without symptomatic disease andnormal lung function, no treatment is necessary. She should receive reassurance and closefollow-up for development of symptomatic disease. In stage I disease, between 50 and90% will resolve spontaneously without treatment. When treatment is necessary, predni-sone is the treatment of choice initially. Usually doses of 20–40 mg are effective, but withcardiac or neurologic involvement, higher doses of prednisone, up to 1 mg/kg, are oftennecessary. For severe manifestations of sarcoidosis, addition of azathioprine, methotrex-ate, or cyclophosphamide may be required. Joint and dermatologic manifestations oftenrespond well to hydroxychloroquine. This patient has no evidence of infection by clinicalhistory, with a biopsy that is negative for fungal and mycobacterial organisms. Treatmentwith antifungal or mycobacterial therapy is not indicated.
280 VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VI-94. The answer is B.   (Chap. 311; P Lieberman et al: J Allergy Clin Immunol 115:S483, 2005)
This patient is presenting with severe anaphylaxis manifested by respiratory failure and sus-
tained hypotension not responsive to initial treatment with IM epinephrine and IV ﬂuids. Atthis point, management should focus upon establishing and maintaining blood pressure foradequate organ perfusion. Life-threatening anaphylaxis is an immediate IgE-mediated hy-persensitivity reaction that usually appears within minutes of exposure to a sensitized anti-gen. However, most individuals who die of anaphylaxis related to insect stings are unaware oftheir sensitization. Symptoms of anaphylaxis include urticaria, angioedema, laryngospasm,bronchospasm, and vascular collapse. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may also occur. Withthe onset of anaphylactic shock, massive vasodilatation and capillary leak occur. In onestudy, it was estimated that there was a 50% decrease in intravascular volume within the ﬁrstfew minutes of anaphylactic shock ( MM Fisher: Anaesth Intens Care 14(1):17, 1986 ). The ﬁrst
step in treating anaphylaxis is to administer epinephrine 0.3 to 0.5 mg (0.3–0.5 mL of a 1:1000 solution) IM or SC. In severe anaphylaxis, the IM route is preferred. Additional dosescan be given as needed every 5 min, and there is no absolute contraindication to ongoingtreatment with epinephrine in anaphylaxis. If anaphylaxis fails to improve quickly with ad-ministration of epinephrine, establishment of a secure airway and delivery of oxygen shouldbe paramount. In addition, rapid bolus of 1–2 L of intravenous ﬂuids through large-bore IVsis indicated to replace intravascular volume. Previous studies have demonstrated no differ-ence between colloid and crystalloid solutions for initial volume resuscitation in anaphylaxis.However, lactated Ringer’s solution should not be used because of an increased risk of meta-bolic acidosis. Ongoing shock that is refractory to the above therapies is best treated with on-going administration of large volumes of IV ﬂuids, as described in the scenario, as well ascontinued administration of epinephrine via the IV route. Initial doses of IV epinephrinerange from 0.1–0.3 mg administered over several minutes, and institution of a continuousinfusion of epinephrine at a rate of 0.2–2 mg/min can be considered. Other vasopressor ther-apy such as dopamine or vasopressin can be added to maintain blood pressure if the shock isrefractory to epinephrine infusion. Antihistamine therapy with H
1 and H 2 blockers are con-
sidered second-line therapy after epinephrine, as these agents have a slower onset of action.Antihistamine therapy alone should not be given for treatment of anaphylactic shock. Glu-cocorticoids have no role in the acute therapy of anaphylaxis, but should be administeredonce the patient is stabilized to prevent late-phase reactions with recurrent anaphylaxis. Dis-connecting the patient from the ventilator would be appropriate for the treatment of hy-potension due to the development of intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure. However, inthis case, the patient is set at a low respiratory rate. In addition, it is noted that the wheezingstops prior to the next inhalation, suggesting that the patient is fully exhaling the inspiredtidal volume. Thus, it is unlikely that intrinsic-PEEP is occurring.
VI-95. The answer is C.   (Chap. 265)   As the mortality from sepsis has increased over the past 20
years, more research has been performed to attempt to limit mortality. Speciﬁc therapieshave been developed to target the inﬂammatory response to sepsis, particularly the effect ofthe inﬂammatory response on the coagulation system. Activated protein C was the ﬁrst drugapproved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of septic shock. Thisdrug is an anticoagulant that may also have antiapoptotic and anti-inﬂammatory proper-ties. In a randomized controlled trial, activated protein C was associated with an absolute re-duction in mortality of 6.1%, and the effect of the drug on mortality was greatest in thosewho were most critically ill. However, in those individuals who are less severely ill, activatedprotein C may increase mortality. While it is unethical to randomize individuals to a trial as-sessing the appropriate timing of antibiotic delivery, retrospective analyses have demon-strated an increased risk of death if antibiotics are not given within 1 h of presentation. Asingle-center trial of early goal-directed therapy in septic shock showed a survival advantagewhen this approach was taken. Early goal-directed therapy developed a protocol for ﬂuidadministration, institution of vasopressors, and blood transfusion based on physiologic pa-rameters, including mean arterial pressure, central venous oxygen saturation, and presenceof acidosis among others. Bicarbonate therapy is commonly used when severe metabolic ac-idosis (pH <7.2) is present in septic shock. However, there is no evidence that bicarbonateimproves hemodynamics, response to vasopressors, or outcomes in septic shock.
VI. D ISORDERS OF THE  RESPIRATORY  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 281
VI-96. The answer is D.   (Chap. 34)   The patient presents with chronic cough as it has lasted
for more than 3 weeks. He denies symptoms of the most common causes of chronic
cough, such as asthma, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, and postnasal drip. However, hedoes take an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, which is known to causechronic cough in 5 to 20% of the patients who take this class of medications. Cough thatis due to ACE inhibitors generally begins between 1 week and 6 months after medicationinitiation. The most appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic step at this point is to dis-continue the ramipril. Angiotensin receptor blockers can be used instead of the ACE in-hibitor to improve cardiac outcomes but are generally not recommended as ﬁrst-linetherapy. In light of this patient’s lack of risk factors for malignancy and lack of sputumproduction, bronchoscopy would not be helpful in this case. Furosemide and digoxin arenot associated with cough. As the patient denies having infectious or constitutionalsymptoms, empirical courses of antibiotics are not warranted.
This page intentionally left blank 
283VII. DISORDERS OF THE URINARY 
AND KIDNEY TRACT
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best  response to each question.
VII-1.   A clinic patient who has a diagnosis of polycystic
kidney disease has been doing research on the Internet.
She is asymptomatic and has no signiﬁcant family his-tory. She asks you for screening for intracranial aneu-rysms. Y ou recommend which of the following?
A. Head CT scan without contrast
B. CT angiogramC. Cerebral angiogramD. Magnetic resonance angiogramE. No further testing
VII-2.   Which of the following is the most potent stimulus
for hypothalamic production of arginine vasopressin?
A. Hypertonicity
B. HyperkalemiaC. HypokalemiaD. HypotonicityE. Intravascular volume depletion
VII-3.   A 28-year-old woman with HIV on antiretroviral ther-
apy complains of abdominal pain in the emergency depart-ment. Laboratory data show a creatinine of 3.2 mg/dL; herbaseline creatinine is 1.0 mg/dL. Urinalysis shows large num-bers of white blood cells and red blood cells without epithelialcells, leukocyte esterase, or nitrites. Which test is indicated todiagnose the cause of her acute renal failure?
A. Acid-fast stain of the urine
B. Anti-GBM (glomerular base membrane) antibodiesC. Renal angiogramD. Renal ultrasoundE. Urine electrolytes
VII-4.   Y ou are evaluating a 40-year-old patient admitted to
the hospital with cirrhosis and an upper gastrointestinalbleed. The bleeding was treated with endoscopy and photo-coagulation, and the patient is now stable. He required twounits of packed red blood cells. He was brieﬂy hypotensiveupon admission but has remained stable for the past 5 days.He is becoming oliguric. Laboratory data show a creatinineof 4.0 mg/dL, whereas his baseline is 0.8–1.1 mg/dL. So-dium is 140 meq/L, BUN is 49 mg/dL. Urine sedimentshows rare granular casts. His urine sodium is 50 meq/L,urine osmolality 287 mosmol and urine creatinine is 35 mg/dL. What is the cause of this patient’s acute renal failure?
A. Acute interstitial nephritis
B. Acute tubular necrosisC. GlomerulonephritisD. Hepatorenal syndromeE. Prerenal azotemia
VII-5.   The pain associated with acute urinary tract ob-
struction is a result of which of the following?
A. Compensatory natriuresis
B. Decreased medullary blood ﬂowC. Increased renal blood ﬂowD. Vasodilatory prostaglandins
VII-6.   Preoperative assessment of a 55-year-old male pa-
tient going for coronary angiography shows an estimatedglomerular ﬁltration rate of 33 mL/min per 1.73 m
2 and
poorly controlled diabetes. He is currently on no nephro-toxic medications, and the nephrologist assures you thathe does not currently have acute renal failure. The case isdue to begin in 4 h, and you would like to prevent con-trast nephropathy. Which agent will deﬁnitely reduce therisk of contrast nephropathy?
A. Dopamine
B. FenoldopamC. IndomethacinD. N-acetylcysteine
E. Sodium bicarbonate
VII-7.   All the following forms of glomerulonephritis (GN)
have associated normal serum complement C4 levels except
A. lupus nephritis stage IVB. poststreptococcal GNC. hemolytic-uremic syndromeD. membranoproliferative GN type IIE. endocarditis-associated GNVII-4. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
284 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS
VII-8.    An 84-year-old female nursing home resident is
brought to the emergency department due to lethargy. At
the nursing home, she was found to have a blood pressureof 85/60 mmHg, heart rate 101 beats/min, temperature37.8°C. Laboratory data are obtained: sodium 137 meq/L,potassium 2.8 meq/L, HCO
3– 8 meq/L, chloride 117 meq/L,
BUN 17 mg/dL, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL. An arterial bloodgas shows Pa
O2 80 mmHg, P CO2 24 mmHg, pH 7.29. Her
urine analysis is clear and has a pH of 4.5. What is theacid-base disorder?
A. Anion-gap metabolic acidosis
B. Non-anion gap metabolic acidosisC. Non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis and respiratory
alkalosis
D. Respiratory acidosis
VII-9.    What is the most likely cause of the acid-base disor-
der of the patient in the preceding scenario?
A. Diarrhea
B. Diuretic useC. Hyperacute renal failureD. HypoaldosteronismE. Proximal renal tubular acidosis
VII-10.    A 79-year-old male with a history of dementia is
brought to the emergency department because of an 8-hhistory of lethargy. For the last 2 days he has been com-plaining of lower abdominal pain. His oral intake wasnormal until the last 8 h. The patient takes no medica-tions. T emperature is normal, blood pressure is 150/90mmHg, heart rate is 105/min, and respirations are 20/min. Physical examination is notable for elevated neckveins and diffuse lower abdominal pain with normalbowel sounds. The bladder is percussed to the umbilicus,and there is an enlarged prostate. He is lethargic but re-sponsive. Serum chemistries are notable for sodium of128 meq/L, potassium of 5.7 meq/L, BUN of 100 mg/dL,and creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Two months ago his labora-tory studies were normal. A Foley catheter is placed,yielding 1100 mL of urine. Which of the following state-ments regarding his clinical condition is true?
A. His renal function probably will return to normal
within the next week.
B. He will need aggressive volume resuscitation over
the next 24 h.
C. He will have oliguria over the next 24 h.
D. Immediate dialysis is indicated.E. Urinalysis will reveal hypertonic urine.
VII-11.    A 71-year-old woman is transferred to your hospi-
tal with new-onset renal failure requiring hemodialysis.On hospital day 1 at the outside hospital, she was admit-ted with a Killip class III inferior myocardial infarction.She underwent percutaneous coronary intervention onday 1 with successful angioplasty. On day 2, she spiked afever and was started on gentamicin and a ﬂuoroquino-lone for pneumonia. A chest x-ray showed pulmonaryvascular congestion on day 3, which was treated with IVloop diuretic. She complained of leg pain on day 4 whichresponded well to potassium repletion and ibuprofen.She is transferred to you with a urinalysis that shows 17white blood cells, 1 red blood cell, 0 epithelial cells, noleukocyte esterase. Hansel’s stain is positive for eosino-phils. Serum laboratory studies show a creatinine of 4.2mg/dL and undetectable complement levels. It is nowhospital day 7. On which hospital day was her renal fail-ure caused?
A. 1
B. 2C. 3D. 4
VII-12.   A 57-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for
dehydration and confusion. In the emergency depart-ment he complained of excessive thirst and he was foundto have a serum sodium of 162 meq/L and a newly ele-vated creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. After receiving IV ﬂuid, hissensorium clears and the patient relays to you that hedrinks large amounts of ﬂuid each day and makes about 2L of urine each day. He has noticed that his urine outputhas no relation to the amount of ﬂuid he drinks. His so-dium remains elevated at 150 meq/L, and his urine osmo-lality returns at 80 mosmol/kg. After careful waterrestriction, you administer 10 µg of desmopressin intra-
nasally and remeasure his urine osmolality. The osmolal-ity is now 94 mosmol/kg. What is the most likely cause ofhis hypernatremia?
A. Chronic hyperventilation
B. Diabetes insipidusC. Excessive solute intakeD. Gastrointestinal lossesE. Surreptitious use of diuretics
VII-13.   What is the correct long-term treatment for the pa-
tient in the preceding scenario?
A. Arginine vasopressin (A VP) analogues
B. Brain imaging and, if indicated, resectionC. Lithium carbonateD. NarcoticsE. Salt restriction and diuretics
VII-14.   A 53-year-old female with long-standing depres-
sion and a history of rheumatoid arthritis is brought in byher daughter, who states that she found an empty bottleof acetylsalicylic acid by her mother’s bedside. The pa-tient is found to be confused and lethargic and is unableto provide a deﬁnitive history. What is the most likely setof laboratory values?VII-11. (Continued)
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS 285
VII-15.   Y ou are evaluating a 28-year-old man from Peru
with abdominal pain. As part of the diagnostic workup,
an abdominal ultrasound shows bilateral hydronephrosisand hydroureters. Which of the following conditions isleast likely in this patient?
A. Lymphoma
B. Meatal stenosisC. PhimosisD. Retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis
VII-16.   A 45-year-old male with a diagnosis of ESRD sec-
ondary to diabetes mellitus is being treated with perito-neal dialysis. This is being carried out as a continuousambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). He undergoesfour 2-L exchanges per day and has been doing so for ap-proximately 4 years. Complications of peritoneal dialysisinclude which of the following?
A. Hypotension after drainage of dialysate
B. HypoalbuminemiaC. HypercholesterolemiaD. HypoglycemiaE. Left pleural effusion
VII-17.   While on rotation in a rural clinic, you are asked to
evaluate a 70-year-old man with fever, shortness of breathand a productive cough. Y ou appreciate increased fremi-tus with egophony over the right lower lung ﬁeld andmake a presumptive diagnosis of community-acquiredpneumonia. Blood pressure is 138/74 mmHg, heart rate99 beats/min, temperature 38.6°C and weight 72 kg. Hehas a history of a nephrectomy, and he tells you that his“kidneys don’t work at 100%.” Before prescribing antibi-otics, you would like to know his renal function. Whatadditional data do you need in order to calculate his crea-tinine clearance using the Cockcroft-Gault formula?
A. Plasma creatinine
B. Plasma and urine creatinineC. Race and plasma creatinineD. Race, plasma creatinine, and urine creatinine
VII-18.   Y ou are able to send the patient to the local hospital
to get laboratory values drawn. His serum creatinine is1.5 mg/dL, sodium 138 meq/L, potassium 3.8 meq/L,urine creatinine is 12 mmol. Using the Cockcroft-Gaultequation, what is this patient’s creatinine clearance?
A. 27 mL/min
B. 47 mL/minC. 70 mL/minD. 105 mL/min
VII-19.    All of these ﬁndings are consistent with a chronic
unilateral urinary tract obstruction except
A. anemiaB. dysuriaC. hypertensionD. pain with micturitionE. pyuria
VII-20.    A 72-year-old male develops acute renal failure af-
ter cardiac catheterization. Physical examination is nota-ble for diminished peripheral pulses, livedo reticularis,epigastric tenderness, and confusion. Laboratory studiesinclude (mg/dL) BUN 131, creatinine 5.2, and phosphate9.5. Urinalysis shows 10 to 15 white blood cells (WBC), 5to 10 red blood cells (RBC), and one hyaline cast perhigh-power ﬁeld (HPF). The most likely diagnosis is
A. acute interstitial nephritis caused by drugs
B. rhabdomyolysis with acute tubular necrosisC. acute tubular necrosis secondary to radiocontrast
exposure
D. cholesterol embolizationE. renal arterial dissection with prerenal azotemia
VII-21.    A 34-year-old male is brought to the hospital with
altered mental status. He has a history of alcoholism. Heis somnolent and does not answer questions. Physical ex-amination reveals blood pressure 130/80, heart rate 105/min, respiratory rate 24/min, and temperature 37°C(98.6°F). The remainder of the physical examination isunremarkable. Microscopic analysis of urine is shown be-low. Which of the following most likely will be found onfurther diagnostic evaluation?Na+K+Cl–HCO 3–
Serum Creatinine 
µmol/L (mg/dL)Room Air ABG
(Serum, meq/L) P O2 PCO2 pH
A 140 3.9 85 26 141 (1.6) 100 40 7.40
B 140 3.9 85 16 141 (1.6) 100 20 7.40
C 140 5.8 100 20 141 (1.6) 100 34 7.38D 150 2.9 100 36 141 (1.6) 80 46 7.50E 116 3.7 85 22 141 (1.6) 80 46 7.50VII-14. (Continued)
286 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS
A. More than 10,000 bacterial colonies on urine culture
B. Anion gap metabolic acidosisC. Hydronephrosis on ultrasoundD. Nephrolithiasis on CT scanE. Positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
VII-22.    A 52-year-old man is found at home hypotensive
and confused. In the emergency department, his bloodpressure is 82/60 mmHg and his heart rate is 115 beats/min. He is confused and lethargic. Laboratory data show:Sodium 133 meq/L, potassium 2.4 meq/L, chloride 70meq/L, HCO
3– 50 meq/L, BUN 44 mg/dL, creatinine 1.7
mg/dL. An arterial blood gas shows P O2 of 62 mmHg, P CO2
49 mmHg, pH 7.66. What acid-base disorder is present?
A. Anion gap metabolic acidosis
B. Metabolic alkalosisC. Metabolic alkalosis plus respiratory acidosisD. Respiratory acidosisE. Respiratory alkalosis
VII-23.    What is the most likely cause of the acid-base disor-
der for the patient in the preceding scenario?
A. Acute myocardial infarction
B. Bartter syndromeC. Cushing’s diseaseD. Mineralocorticoid excessE. Vomiting
VII-24.    A 52-year-old diabetic patient is referred to the emer-
gency department from the endoscopy suite. The patienthas diabetes and a history of colon cancer that was removed3 years ago. He also has hyperlipidemia, which is well con-trolled on atorvastatin. He presented to the Endoscopy suitefor a scheduled surveillance colonoscopy. Blood drawnupon arrival to shows a sodium of 121 meq/L and the pa-tient seemed disoriented. On physical examination, mu-cous membranes are dry and there is no axillary moisture.Serum osmolality is checked and is 270 mosmol/kg. What isthe most likely cause of this patient’s hyponatremia?
A. Diabetes insipidus
B. HyperglycemiaC. HyperlipidemiaD. HypovolemiaE. Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH)
VII-25.   Y ou are evaluating a patient with stage 5 chronic
kidney disease (CKD) who has an estimated glomerularﬁltration rate of 12 mL/min per 1.73 m
2. She has no com-
plaints and takes all of her medications on schedule. Phys-ical examination reveals a woman in no acute distress.There is no pericardial rub, and reﬂexes and mental statusare intact. She has trace peripheral edema. Laboratorydata show a creatinine of 6.3 mg/dL, potassium 4.8 meq/L,HCO
3– 20 meq/L. She has known proteinuria. What is
best next step in the management of this patient’s CKD?
A. Check serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
B. Continue current managementC. Referral to the emergency department for initiation
of dialysis
D. Renal biopsyE. Urine analysis
VII-26.   Y our clinic patient presents to your ofﬁce com-
plaining of numbness and tingling in her hands andaround her mouth. On physical examination, you illicitChovstek’s sign (twitching of the circumoral muscles inresponse to gently tapping on the facial nerve) and Trous-seau’s sign (carpal spasm induced by inﬂation of a bloodpressure cuff to 20 mmHg above the patient’s systolicblood pressure for 3 min. Y ou make a presumptive diag-nosis of hypocalcemia. What laboratory test is the nextstep in diagnosing the cause of her hypocalcemia?
A. 1,25(OH
2)D
B. Ionized calcium
C. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)D. Serum magnesiumE. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
VII-27.   A 25-year-old man comes to your clinic because of
a change in the color of his urine. He states that his urinehas become red-tinged and has the foaminess of beer inthe bowl. He has no abdominal pain or respiratory com-plaints. He has no cough, although he does report unin-tentional weight loss of 2–7 kg over the past month. Hehas no past medical history. In your ofﬁce, you perform aurinalysis and dipstick which shows red blood cell (RBC)casts and RBCs (including dysmorphic cells). He has nowhite blood cells and no bacteria. The urine dipsick is 2+,with a spot protein-to-creatinine ratio of 850. What is thenext step in this patient’s evaluation?FIGURE VII-21VII-21.    (Continued) VII-24. (Continued)

VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS 287
A. Measure antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody levels
B. CystoscopyC. Initiate therapy with an angiotensin-converting en-
zyme (ACE) inhibitor with close follow-up
D. Measure urine microalbuminE. Renal CT scan
VII-28.    A 10-year-old girl complaining of profound weak-
ness, occasional difﬁculty walking, and polyuria is broughtto the pediatrician. Her mother is sure the girl has notbeen vomiting frequently. The girl takes no medicines. Sheis normotensive, and no focal neurologic abnormalities arefound. Serum chemistries include Na
+ 142 mmol/L, K+ 2.5
mmol/L, HCO 3– 32 mmol/L, and Cl– 100 mmol/L. A 24-h
urine collection on a normal diet reveals Na+ 200 mmol/d,
K+ 50 mmol/d, and Cl– 30 mmol/d. Renal ultrasound
demonstrates symmetrically enlarged kidneys without hy-dronephrosis. A stool phenolphthalein test and a urinescreen for diuretics are negative. Plasma renin levels arefound to be elevated. Which of the following conditions ismost consistent with these data?
A. Conn’s syndrome
B. Chronic ingestion of licoriceC. Bartter’s syndromeD. Wilms’ tumorE. Proximal renal tubular acidosis
VII-29.   A 56-year-old male is evaluated in the clinic after
complaining of inability to maintain an erection. He re-ports good sexual function until 4 months ago. Since thattime he has noted that he cannot maintain erections. Thepatient awakens three times weekly with an erection thatis unchanged compared with his previous status. Hestates that his libido is unchanged but that he loses hiserection within minutes. He has been married for 25years and denies any extramarital affairs. He does notsmoke. Recently the patient has had increased stressors inhis life when he was laid off his job as a worker in an oilreﬁnery. Past medical history is signiﬁcant for hyperten-sion, which is being treated with atenolol. On physical ex-amination, blood pressure is 136/76 mmHg and heartrate is 64/min. The patient has normal secondary sexualcharacteristics without gynecomastia. There is no liverenlargement. The testes are ﬁrm and rubbery withoutmasses and have an estimated volume of 35 mL by orchi-ometry. The penis is circumcised and without ﬁbroticplaques. Rectal examination reveals a normal prostateand normal anal sphincter tone. The bulbocavernosus re-ﬂex is intact. Prostate speciﬁc antigen (PSA) is 4.12 ng/mL. The testosterone level is 537 ng/dL. What is the bestway to treat this patient’s erectile dysfunction?
A. Discontinue atenolol.
B. Start sildenaﬁl.C. Initiate therapy with transdermal testosterone.D. Initiate therapy with intraurethral injection of al-
prostadil.
E. Further explore the patient’s psychosocial history
for evidence of anxiety and depression and considerreferral for psychotherapy.
VII-30.    A 32-year-old patient presents to your clinic com-
plaining of right-sided ﬂank pain and dark urine. Hestates that these symptoms began about a month ago. Hedenies any burning on urination and has had no fevers.He has not suffered any trauma and has not been sexuallyactive recently. On review of systems he reports early sati-ety and describes a burning sensation in his chest whenhe lies down. An ultrasound of his right ﬂank is per-formed and reveals >20 cysts of varying sizes in his rightkidney. Which of the following statements is true?
A. Adult-onset polycystic kidney disease (PCKD) will
lead to end-stage renal disease in 100% of patients
by age 70.
B. Aortic stenosis is present in 25% of patient with
PCKD.
C. 40% of patients with PCKD will have hepatic cysts
by age 60.
D. PCKD is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait in
adults.
E. There is a signiﬁcantly increased risk of embolic
stroke in patients with PCKD.
VII-31.    In patients with chronic renal failure, which of the
following is the most important contributor to renal os-teodystrophy?
A. Impaired renal production of 1,25-dihydroxyvita-
min D
3 [1,25(OH) 2D3]
B. Hypocalcemia
C. HypophosphatemiaD. Loss of vitamin D and calcium via dialysisE. The use of calcitriol
VII-32.    A 74-year-old female sees her physician for a fol-
low-up visit for hypertension. One week ago she wasstarted on an oral medication for hypertension. She takesno other medications. Blood pressure is 125/80 mmHg,and heart rate is 72/min. Serum chemistries reveal a so-dium of 132 meq/L. Two weeks ago serum chemistrieswere normal. Which of the following medications mostlikely was initiated 1 week ago?
A. Enalapril
B. FurosemideC. HydrochlorothiazideD. MetoprololE. Spironolactone
VII-33.    Laboratory evaluation of a 19-year-old male who is
being worked up for polyuria and polydipsia yields thefollowing results:VII-27. (Continued) VII-29. (Continued)
288 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS
Serum electrolytes (meq/L): Na+ 144, K+ 4.0, Cl– 107,
HCO 3– 25
BUN: 6.4 mmol/L (18 mg/dL)
Blood glucose: 5.7 mmol/L (102 mg/dL)Urine electrolytes (mmol/L): Na
+ 28, K+ 32
Urine osmolality: 195 mosmol/kg water
After 12 h of ﬂuid deprivation, body weight has
fallen by 5%. Laboratory testing now reveals the fol-lowing:
Serum electrolytes (meq/L): Na
+ 150, K+ 4.1, Cl– 109,
HCO 3– 25
BUN: 7.1 mmol/L (20 mg/dL)
Blood glucose: 5.4 mmol/L (98 mg/dL)Urine electrolytes (mmol/L): Na
+ 24, K+ 35
Urine osmolality: 200 mosmol/kg water
One hour after the subcutaneous administration of 5
units of arginine vasopressin urine values are as follows:
Urine electrolytes (meq/L): Na+ 30, K+ 30
Urine osmolality: 199 mosmol/kg water
The likely diagnosis is
A. nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
B. osmotic diuresisC. salt-losing nephropathyD. psychogenic polydipsiaE. none of the above
VII-34.    A 28-year-old man is diagnosed with acute myelog-
enous leukemia and has a white blood cell count of168,000/µL. He initiates chemotherapy with cytarabine,etoposide, and daunorubicin. Within 24 h, his creatininehas increased from 1.0 mg/dL to 2.5 mg/dL, and he is oli-guric. Pretreatment with which of the following medica-tions may have prevented this complication?
A. Allopurinol
B. ColchicineC. FurosemideD. PrednisoneE. Sodium bicarbonate
VII-35.    A 37-year-old man is brought to the emergency de-
partment by his wife from home. He was painting theirgarage and became unconscious. He has no past medicalhistory. CT scan of the head is normal. Urine and serumtoxicology screen, including ethanol and acetaminophen,are negative. Laboratory data show: Sodium 138 meq/L,potassium 4.4 meq/L, HCO
3– 5 meq/L, chloride 102 meq/
L, BUN 15 mg/dL, calcium 9.7 mg/dL, glucose 94 mg/dL.An arterial blood gas on room air shows Pa
O2 95 mmHg,
PCO2 20 mmHg, pH 7.02. A urine analysis is unremark-
able. On physical examination his blood pressure is 110/72mmHg. He is barely arousable but responds to painfulstimuli. Otherwise, he has no focal abnormalities. What isthe acid-base disorder?
A. Anion-gap metabolic acidosis
B. Anion-gap metabolic acidosis with respiratory alkalosisC. Non-anion-gap metabolic acidosisD. Respiratory acidosis
VII-36.   The “dose” of dialysis is currently deﬁned as
A. the counter-current ﬂow rate of the dialysateB. the fractional urea clearanceC. the hours per week of dialysisD. the number of sessions actually completed in a month
VII-37.   A patient with a diagnosis of scleroderma who has
diffuse cutaneous involvement presents with malignanthypertension, oliguria, edema, hemolytic anemia, and re-nal failure. Y ou make a diagnosis of scleroderma renal cri-sis (SRC). What is the recommended treatment?
A. Captopril
B. CarvedilolC. ClonidineD. DiltiazemE. Nitroprusside
VII-38.   Y our patient with end-stage renal disease on hemo-
dialysis has persistent hyperkalemia. He has a history oftotal bilateral renal artery stenosis, which is why he is onhemodialysis. He only has electrocardiogram changeswhen his potassium rises above 6.0 meq/L, which occursa few times per week. Y ou admit him to the hospital forfurther evaluation. Y our laboratory evaluation, nutritioncounseling, and medication adjustments have not im-pacted his serum potassium. What is the next reasonablestep to undertake for this patient?
A. Adjust the dialysate.
B. Administer a daily dose of furosemide.C. Perform “sodium modeling.”D. Implant an automatic deﬁbrillator.E. Perform bilateral nephrectomy.
VII-39.   A 63-year-old male is brought to the emergency de-
partment after having a seizure. He has a history of anunresectable lung mass treated with palliative radiationtherapy. He is known to have a serum sodium of 128meq/L chronically. The patient’s wife reports that on thenight before admission he was somnolent. This morning,while she was trying to awaken him, he developed a gen-eralized tonic-clonic seizure lasting approximately 1 min.In the emergency room he is unresponsive. Vital signsand physical examination are otherwise normal. Serumsodium is 111 meq/L. He is treated with 3% saline andtransferred to the intensive care unit. One day later serumsodium is 137 meq/L. He has had no further seizuressince admission and is awake but is barely able to moveVII-33. (Continued) VII-35. (Continued)
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS 289
his extremities and is dysarthric. Which of the following
studies is most likely to explain his current condition?
A. Arteriogram showing a vertebral artery thrombus
B. CT of the head showing metastasesC. EEG showing focal seizuresD. MRI of the brainstem showing demyelinationE. Transesophageal echocardiogram showing left atrial
thrombus
VII-40.   A 25-year-old female with nephrotic syndrome
from minimal-change disease is seen in the emergencydepartment with increased right leg swelling. Ultrasoundof the leg shows thrombosis of the superﬁcial femoralvein. Which of the following is not a mechanism of hy-percoagulability in this disorder?
A. Increased platelet aggregation
B. Low serum levels of protein C and protein SC. Chronic disseminated intravascular coagulationD. HyperﬁbrinogenemiaE. Low serum levels of antithrombin III
VII-41.   It is hospital day 5 for a 65-year-old patient with
prerenal azotemia secondary to dehydration. His creati-nine was initially 3.6 mg/dL on admission, but it has im-proved today to 2.1 mg/dL. He complains of mild lowerback pain, and you prescribe naproxen to be taken inter-mittently. By what mechanism might this drug furtherimpair his renal function?
A. Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
B. Afferent arteriolar vasodilatationC. Efferent arteriolar vasoconstrictionD. Proximal tubular toxicityE. Ureteral obstruction
VII-42.   A 63-year-old male with a history of diabetes melli-
tus is found to have a lung nodule on chest radiography.T o stage the disease further he undergoes a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest. One week before the CTscan, his BUN is 26 mg/dL and his creatinine is 1.8 mg/dL. Three days after the study he complains of dyspnea,pedal edema, and decreased urinary output. Repeat BUNis 86 mg/dL and creatinine is 4.4 mg/dL. The most likelymechanism of the acute renal failure is
A. acute tubular necrosis
B. allergic hypersensitivityC. cholesterol emboliD. immune-complex glomerulonephritisE. ureteral outﬂow obstruction
VII-43.   In the patient in Question VII-42 the urinalysis is
most likely to show
A. granular casts
B. red blood cell castsC. urinary eosinophilsD. urinary neutrophilsE. white blood cell casts
VII-44.    A 35-year-old female presents with complaints of
bilateral lower extremity edema, polyuria, and moderateleft-sided ﬂank pain that began approximately 2 weeksago. There is no past medical history. She is taking nomedications and denies tobacco, alcohol, or illicit druguse. Examination shows normal vital signs, includingnormal blood pressure. There is 2+ edema in bilaterallower extremities. The 24-h urine collection is signiﬁcantfor 3.5 g of protein. Urinalysis is bland except for the pro-teinuria. Serum creatinine is 0.7 mg/dL, and ultrasoundexamination shows the left kidney measuring 13 cm andthe right kidney measuring 11.5 cm. Y ou are concernedabout renal vein thrombosis. What test do you choose forthe evaluation?
A. Computed tomography of the renal veins
B. Contrast venographyC. Magnetic resonance venographyD.
99Tc-labeled pentetic acid (DPTA) imaging
E. Ultrasound with Doppler evaluation of the renal
veins
VII-45.    The posterior pituitary secretes arginine vaso-
pressin (antidiuretic hormone) under which of the fol-lowing stressors?
A. Hyperosmolarity
B. HypernatremiaC. Volume depletionD. A and BE. A and C
VII-46.    A 29-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with
a severe asthma exacerbation. He is taken to the intensivecare unit (ICU) and treated with continuous aerosolizedβ-adrenergic agonists and glucocorticoids. He requiresbilevel positive airway pressure mechanical respiration.After 18 h of this therapy, his respiratory status begins toimprove. He begins to complain of fatigue and myalgiasin his legs. He has difﬁculty ambulating and on neuro-logic examination he has three out of ﬁve symmetricweakness in the lower extremities. On the cardiac moni-tor, you notice ﬂattened T waves, ST depression, and aprolonged QT interval. What is the cause of this patient’sneurologic and cardiac ﬁndings?
A. Adrenal insufﬁciency
B. ICU psychosisC. Medication effectD. Myocardial infarction with congestive heart failureE. T odd’s paralysis
VII-47.    A 33-year-old male is brought for medical atten-
tion after completing an ultramarathon. Upon ﬁnishinghe was disoriented and light-headed. His normal weightVII-39. (Continued) VII-43. (Continued)
290 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS
is 60 kg. Physical examination reveals a body temperature
of 38.3°C (100.9°F), blood pressure of 85/60 mmHg, andheart rate of 125/min. The patient’s neck veins are ﬂat,and skin turgor is poor. Laboratory studies are notablefor a serum sodium of 175 meq/L. The patient’s estimatedfree water deﬁcit is
A. 0.75 L
B. 1.5 LC. 7.5 LD. 15 LE. 22.5 L
VII-48.    A 66-year-old woman is being treated with penicil-
lin for mitral valve endocarditis due to Streptococcus viri-
dans . She initially improved with resolution of her fever
after 7 days, but now comes to the emergency room com-plaining of fever and rash during week 4 of her treatment.She continues to receive penicillin IV via a central lineequipped with an infusion system. She has had no drain-age from the site of her central line and has otherwisebeen feeling well until she developed a diffuse pruriticrash over her entire body, beginning on her trunk.  Shealso has had a fever to as high as 38.3°C at home. On ex-amination, she has an erythematous maculopapular rashover her trunk and legs. In many areas, it has coalesced toform raised plaques. She currently has a temperature of39°C. Her laboratory values shows a white blood cellcount of 12,330/ µL with 72% polymorphonuclear cells,
12% lymphocytes, 5% monocytes, and 11% eosinophils.Her BUN is 65 mg/dL, and creatinine is 2.5 mg/dL. At thetime of her hospital discharge, the patient’s BUN was 24mg/dL and creatinine was 1.2 mg/dL. Which test is mostlikely to yield the diagnosis of her acute renal failure?
A. 24-h urine protein level
B. Antistreptolysin O titersC. Blood culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacteriaD. EchocardiogramE. Hansel’s stain for eosinophils in the urine
VII-49.    All the following are complications during hemo-
dialysis except
A. anaphylactoid reactionB. feverC. hyperglycemiaD. hypotensionE. muscle cramps
VII-50.    A 42-year-old man with a history of pulmonary
sarcoidosis is admitted to the intensive care unit withconfusion and nausea. His family reports that he has hadpolyuria and polydipsia for some time but it has in-creased dramatically in the past week. On physical exami-nation, his mucous membranes are dry and he isorthostatic by pulse. In the Emergency room, his bloodglucose is 90 mg/dL. An electrocardiogram (ECG) takenat that time is shown below.
What is the cause of this patient’s symptoms?A. Hypercalcemia
B. HyperkalemiaC. HypocalcemiaD. Hypokalemia
VII-51.    The patient in the preceding scenario is found to have
a serum calcium of 12.1 mg/dL. Of the following interven-tions, what therapy is most appropriate in this patient?
A. Glucocorticoids
B. Intravenous loop diureticC. Intravenous phosphateD. Oral calcitriolE. Zoledronic acidVII-52.    Y ou are consulting to advise on another antihyper-
tensive agent for a patient with difﬁcult-to-control hyper-tension. Despite high doses of a beta blocker, the patientremains hypertensive. The estimated glomerular ﬁltra-tion rate (GFR) is 75 mL/min per 1.73 m
2. On physical
examination, there is no exophthalmos and no thyroidbruit. The great vessels are without bruit as well. Abdom-inal examination reveals bruits loudest in bilateral ﬂanksFIGURE VII-50
VII-47. (Continued) VII-48. (Continued)
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS 291
as well as a left femoral bruit. Peripheral pulses are intact.
An ultrasound conﬁrms the presence of bilateral renal ar-tery stenosis. Which medication class would not be a
good choice to add to this patient’s regimen?
A. Thiazide diuretic
B. Calcium-channel blockerC. Angiotensin II receptor blockerD. Central acting alpha blocker
VII-53.    Which of the following patients in need of dialysis
would receive the greatest beneﬁt from placing a perito-neal dialysis catheter rather than a hemodialysis catheter?
A. High-peritoneal transporters
B. Patients in developing countriesC. Patients older than 65D. Patients with no residual kidney functionE. Patients with prior abdominal surgery
VII-54.    A patient with a history of Sjögren’s syndrome has
the following laboratory ﬁndings: plasma sodium 139meq/L, chloride 112 meq/L, bicarbonate 15 meq/L, andpotassium 3.0 meq/L; urine studies show a pH of 6.0, so-dium of 15 meq/L, potassium of 10 meq/L, and chlorideof 12 meq/L. The most likely diagnosis is
A. type I renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
B. type II RTAC. type III RTAD. type IV RTAE. chronic diarrhea
VII-55.    The condition of a 50-year-old obese female with a
5-year history of mild hypertension controlled by a thia-zide diuretic is being evaluated because proteinuria wasnoted during her routine yearly medical visit. Physical ex-amination disclosed a height of 167.6 cm (66 in.), weightof 91 kg (202 lb), blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, andtrace pedal edema. Laboratory values are as follows:
Serum creatinine: 106 µmol/L (1.2 mg/dL)
BUN: 6.4 mmol/L (18 mg/dL)Creatinine clearance: 87 mL/minUrinalysis: pH 5.0; speciﬁc gravity 1.018; protein 3+; no
glucose; occasional coarse granular cast
Urine protein excretion: 5.9 g/d
A renal biopsy demonstrates that 60% of the glomeruli
have segmental scarring by light microscopy, with the re-mainder of the glomeruli appearing unremarkable (seefollowing ﬁgure).The most likely diagnosis is
A. hypertensive nephrosclerosis
B. focal and segmental sclerosisC. minimal-change (nil) diseaseD. membranous glomerulopathyE. crescentic glomerulonephritis
VII-56.    A 20-year-old college student seeks medical atten-
tion for light-headedness. He just completed a rigoroustennis match and did not drink any water or ﬂuids. Su-pine blood pressure is 110/70 mmHg, and heart rate is105/min. Upright, the blood pressure is 95/60 mmHgwith a heart rate of 125/min. T emperature and mentalstatus are normal. Which of the following laboratory re-sults is most likely in this patient?
A. Serum BUN/creatinine ratio <20
B. Serum sodium <140 meq/LC. Urine potassium <20 meq/LD. Urine sodium <20 meq/LE. Urine red blood cell casts
VII-57.   A 50-year-old male is admitted to the hospital with
pneumonia. He does well after the administration of antibi-otics, but his sodium is noted to rise from 140 to 154 meq/Lover 2 days. He reports thirst and has had a urine output ofapproximately 5 L per day. Which of the following is themost appropriate next step to evaluate the patient’s disorder?
A. Measurement of serum osmolality
B. Measurement of serum vasopressin levelC. 24-h measurement of urinary sodiumD. Trial of arginine vasopressinE. Trial of free water restriction
FIGURE VII-55
VII-52. (Continued) VII-55. (Continued)
292 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — QUESTIONS
VII-58.    A 16-year-old female star gymnast presents to your of-
ﬁce complaining of fatigue, diffuse weakness, and muscle
cramps. She has no previous medical history and denies to-bacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. There is no signiﬁcantfamily history. Examination shows a thin female with nor-mal blood pressure. Body mass index (BMI) is 18 kg/m
2.
Oral examination shows poor dentition. Muscle tone is nor-mal, and neurologic examination is normal. Laboratorystudies show hematocrit of 38.5%, creatinine of 0.6 mg/dL,serum bicarbonate of 30 meq/L, and potassium of 2.7 meq/L. Further evaluation should include which of the following?
A. Urinalysis and urine culture
B. Plasma renin and aldosterone levelsC. Urine toxicology screen for opiatesD. Urine toxicology screen for diureticsE. Serum magnesium levelVII-58. (Continued)
293VII. DISORDERS OF THE URINARY 
AND KIDNEY TRACT
ANSWERS
VII-1. The answer is E.   (Chap. 278)   Intracranial aneurysms are present in 5 to 10% of asymp-
tomatic patients with ADPKD. Screening of all ADPKD patients is not recommended.
Any presenting symptoms or a family history of subarachnoid hemorrhage or suddendeath should prompt further screening with magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) orCT angiography or consideration of cerebral angiography.
VII-2. The answer is A.   (Chap. 46)   Excretion of water is tightly regulated at the collecting duct
by arginine vasopressin (A VP , formerly antidiuretic hormone). An increase in plasma to-nicity is sensed by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, causing A VP secretion from the posteriorpituitary. A VP binding to the collecting duct leads to insertion of water channels (aqua-porin-2) into the luminal membrane, promoting water reabsorption. Serum sodium is theprincipal extracellular solute, and so effective osmolality is determined predominantly bythe plasma sodium concentration. Plasma osmolality normally is regulated within 1 to 2%of normal (280 to 290 mosmol/kg). The sensitivity of the baroreceptors for A VP release isfar less than that of the osmoreceptors. Depletion of intravascular volume sufﬁcient to de-crease mean arterial pressure is necessary to stimulate A VP secretion.
VII-3. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 45 and 273)   In the evaluation of azotemia, the initial diag-
nostic modalities are a urine analysis and renal ultrasound. Renal ultrasound is impor-tant so that obstructive causes can be corrected urgently with urologic evaluation. Thispatient may have an obstructive nephropathy due to nephrolithiasis, as certain HIV med-ications can cause nephrolithiasis. Patients with nephrolithiasis can often have pyuria andhematuria. Urine electrolytes are useful to establish prerenal azotemia but should be per-formed only after urine analysis is unremarkable and renal ultrasound shows normal-sized kidneys. Anti-GBM antibodies are an important component of the evaluation ofglomerulonephritis. Angiogram is useful when renal vascular disease is suspected.
294 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
VII-4. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 45 and 273)   Acute renal failure with urine sediment showing
muddy brown (granular) casts or an amorphous sediment in the absence of white blood
cells, red blood cells, eosinophils or severe proteinuria has a high likelihood of beingacute tubular necrosis. This is particularly true when an episode of renal hypoperfusion(hypotension) is present. It is possible to differentiate between prerenal azotemia andacute tubular necrosis by calculating the fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa) and bymeasuring the BUN/creatinine ratio, urine sodium, urine osmolality, and the urine/plasma creatinine ratio (see Figure VII-3, above). In this case, the BUN/creatinine ratio is<20, the urine sodium is >40 meq/L, urine osmolality <350 mosmol, FeNa 4%, andurine/plasma creatinine <20, indicating that this is acute renal failure with tubular injury.Pyuria is present in 75% of cases of acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) and there is no prox-imate drug exposure to suggest AIN. Hepatorenal syndrome is excluded by the elevatedurine sodium. Glomerulonephritis is unlikely given the absence of red cell casts on urineanalysis and the clinical situation.
VII-5. The answer is C.   (Chap. 283)   In acute urinary tract obstruction, pain is due to disten-
tion of the collecting system or renal capsule. Acutely, there is a compensatory increase inrenal blood ﬂow when kidney function is impaired by obstruction, which further exacer-bates capsular stretch. Eventually, vasodilatory prostaglandins act to preserve renal func-FIGURE VII-3 Approach to the patient with azotemia.  WBC, white blood cell; RBC, red blood
cell; GBM, glomerular basement membrane.AZOTEMIA
Urinalysis and
Renal ultrasound
HydronephrosisRenal size parenchyma
UrinalysisUrologic evaluation
Relieve obstruction
Small kidneys, thin cortex,
  bland sediment,
  isosthenuria
  <3.5 g protein/24 hNormal size kidneys
Intact parenchymaBacteria Pyelonephritis
Chronic Renal Failure
Symptomatic treatment
  delay progression
If end-stage, prepare
  for dialysisNormal
  urinalysisAbnormal
  urinalysisWBC, casts
  eosinophilsInterstitial
  nephritis
Red blood
  cellsRenal artery
  or vein  occlusion
Urine
  electrolytesMuddy brown
  casts,
  amorphous  sediment  + proteinRBC casts
ProteinuriaAngiogram
FeNa<1%
U osmolality > 500 mosmolFeNa>1%
U osmolality < 350 mosmol Renal biopsy
Prerenal Azotemia
Volume contraction,  cardiac failure,
  vasodilatation, drugs,
  sepsis, renal
  vasoconstriction,
  impaired autoregulationAcute Tubular Necrosis Glomerulonephritis
  or vasculitisImmune complex,  anti-GBM diseaseEVALUATION OF AZOTEMIA
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 295
tion when glomerular ﬁltration rate has decreased. Medullary blood ﬂow decreases as the
pressure of the obstruction further inhibits the renal parenchyma from perfusing; how-ever, the ensuing chronic renal destruction may occur without substantial pain. When anobstruction has been relieved, there is a postobstructive diuresis that is mediated by reliefof tubular pressure, increased solute load (per nephron), and natriuretic factors. Therecan be an extreme amount of diuresis, but this is not painful.
VII-6. The answer is E.   (Chap. 273)   Radiocontrast agents cause renal injury through intrare-
nal vasoconstriction and through generation of oxygen radicals causing acute tubular ne-crosis. These medications cause an acute decrease in renal blood ﬂow and glomerularﬁltration rate. Patients with chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, multi-ple myeloma, and volume depletion are at highest risk of contrast nephropathy. It is clearthat hydration with normal saline is an effective measure to prevent contrast nephropathy.Of the other measures mentioned here, only sodium bicarbonate or N-acteylcysteine
could be recommended for clinical use to reduce the risk of contrast nephropathy. Dopa-mine has been proven an ineffective agent to prevent contrast nephropathy. Fenoldopam,a D
1-receptor agonist, has been tested in several clinical trials and does not appear to re-
duce the incidence of contrast nephropathy. Although several small clinical studies havesuggested a clinical beneﬁt to the use of N-acetylcysteine, a meta-analysis has been incon-
clusive, and the medication should be administered well in advance of the procedure. So-dium bicarbonate begun within 1 h of the procedure has shown a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in asingle-center, randomized controlled trial. Due to the time limitations, and based on theevidence, only sodium bicarbonate would be helpful in this patient.
VII-7. The answer is A.   (Chap. 277)   In different disease processes the complement pathway is
activated either by classical pathway activation or by alternative pathway activation. If theclassical pathway is activated, as in lupus nephritis, the serum complement measures ofC3, C4, and CH50 are low. If the alternative pathway is activated, C3 and CH50 may below but C4 is at normal levels. When acute GN is suspected, measurement of serum com-plement levels will often limit the differential diagnosis. Other conditions with normalC4 include ANCA-associated diseases. Low C4 may be seen with membranoproliferativeGN types I and III. Type I disease also may be associated with cryoglobulinemia.
VII-8. The answer is B.   (Chap. 48)   The pH is <7.35, therefore the primary process is an aci-
dosis. The HCO
3– is low and the P CO2 is low, excluding a primary respiratory acidosis.
The anion gap is normal at 12. The expected P CO2 is between 24 and 16 mmHg for appro-
priate respiratory compensation. The P CO2 in this example represents normal respiratory
compensation for a metabolic acidosis.
VII-9. The answer is A.   (Chap. 48)   Metabolic acidosis occurs because of endogenous acid
production or loss of bicarbonate. The anion gap is elevated in the presence of unmea-sured anions (or, less commonly, a loss of unmeasured cations) and is normal with bicar-bonate loss. A fall in the serum albumin of 1 g/dL from normal lowers the expected aniongap by 2.5 meq/L. The differential diagnosis for a non-anion gap metabolic acidosis in-cludes gastrointestinal losses, renal acidosis, and drug-induced and other less commoncauses. Nursing home residents are at risk for institutionally acquired diarrheas, often in-fectious. The urine pH is usually high in proximal renal tubular acidosis, and the patientsusually younger. Defects in the renin-angiotensin system, such as hypoaldosteronism,cause hyperkalemia, not hypokalemia. This patient has no evidence of renal failure. Di-uretic use will usually cause a metabolic alkalosis.
VII-10. The answer is A.   (Chap. 283)   The prognosis for the return of normal renal function is
excellent in patients with acute bilateral renal obstruction, such as an obstruction that isdue to prostate enlargement. With relief of the obstruction, the prognosis depends onwhether irreversible renal damage has occurred. Return of GFR usually follows relief of ob-struction lasting 1 to 2 weeks provided that there has been no intercurrent infection. After8 weeks of obstruction recovery is unlikely. Acute relief of bilateral obstruction commonlyresults in polyuria. An osmotic diuresis caused by excretion of retained urea and resolution
296 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
of volume expansion contributes to the diuresis. The urine is hypotonic. The diuresis usu-
ally abates with resolution of normal extracellular volume, and so aggressive volume resus-citation is generally not necessary unless hypotension or overt volume depletion develops.Indications for acute hemodialysis are those for the usual complications of acute renal fail-ure, including electrolyte disturbances, uremia, and inability to control volume.
VII-11. The answer is A.   (Chap. 273)   Atheroembolic disease can cause acute renal failure
(ARF) after manipulation of the aorta or renal arteries during angiography. Cholesterolcrystals embolize to the renal vasculature and lodge in small- to medium-sized vessels in-citing a ﬁbrotic reaction in the vessel wall, narrowing the lumen. Diagnostic clues to ath-eroembolic ARF are recent manipulation of the aorta or renal vessels, eosinophiluria, andlow complement levels. The ARF usually occurs days to weeks after the inciting event.Aminoglycosides, diuretics, or nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs can cause renal fail-ure but it does not classically present with eosinophiluria or hypocomplementemia.Atheroembolic ARF is usually irreversible.
VII-12. The answer is B.   (Chap. 46)   The differential diagnosis for hypernatremia is fairly narrow
as it results in a relative loss of water. Water is lost via renal or nonrenal mechanisms. Theurine osmolality is a key historic piece of data. If the patient is excreting the minimumamount of maximally concentrated urine, gastrointestinal (osmotic diarrhea), insensible(skin or respiratory loss), or remote renal losses (diabetes mellitus) are the cause. This patientis excreting a large amount of dilute urine. He is not excreting >750 mosms in his urine daily,which would suggest diuretic use. Either central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI) mustbe the cause. In this patient, the lack of response to desmopressin indicates nephrogenic DI.
VII-13. The answer is E.   (Chap. 46)   The patient in the preceding scenario has nephrogenic di-
abetes insipidus (NDI). Causes of NDI include drugs (particularly lithium carbonate),hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, papillary necrosis, or congenital disorders. Symptomaticpolyuria due to NDI can be treated with a low-sodium diet and thiazide diuretics, whichinduce mild volume depletion and enhanced proximal reabsorption of salt and water.Narcotics may be useful in patients with gastrointestinal hypermotility and water loss as aresult thereof. A VP analogues are used to treat central diabetes insipidus and would haveno impact on NDI. If a patient is found to have central diabetes insipidus, brain imagingshould be obtained to rule out destruction of the neurohypophysis. Lithium carbonate isa cause of NDI and should be discontinued if causing symptomatic NDI.
VII-14. The answer is B.   (Chap. 48; N Engl J Med 338:26–34, 1998.)   A respiratory alkalosis with
a combined metabolic acidosis is typical of salicylate toxicity. Salicylate intoxication canresult in respiratory alkalosis, mixed respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis, or, lesscommonly, a simple metabolic acidosis. Respiratory alkalosis is caused by direct stimula-tion of the respiratory center by salicylate. The accumulation of lactic acid and ketoacidsleads to the concomitant metabolic acidosis. The severity of the neurologic manifesta-tions largely depends on the concentration of salicylate in the central nervous system.Therapy is directed at limiting further drug absorption by administering activated char-coal and promoting the exit of salicylate from the CNS. This can be accomplished by al-kalinizing the serum, typically by means of the addition of intravenous ﬂuids withsodium bicarbonate, with the goal of raising the serum pH to between 7.45 and 7.50. In-creasing the GFR will also enhance salicylate excretion. Hemodialysis is reserved for se-vere cases, especially those involving fulminant renal failure.
VII-15. The answer is D.   (Chap. 283)   The level of obstruction is important when considering
urinary tract obstruction. Bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureter suggest either a sys-temic process or mechanical obstruction at or below the level of the uretero-vesical junc-tions. While retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis can cause such a picture, it is most common amongmiddle-aged men. In patients of reproductive age, genital tract infections can causemeatal stenosis if left untreated or if infections are recurrent. Retroperitoneal lymphomascan cause bilateral hydroureter, as can more distal obstructions like phimosis. In the de-veloping world, one may also consider schistosomiasis and genitourinary tuberculosis.
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 297
VII-16. The answer is B.   (Chap. 275; Rubin et al: JAMA 291:697–703, 2004.)   Peritonitis is the
most common serious complication of peritoneal dialysis. These patients typically
present with abdominal pain, fever, and a cloudy peritoneal dialysate. Persistent or recur-rent peritonitis may require the removal of the catheter. Further complications includelosses of amino acids as well as albumin, which may be as much as 5 to 15 g/d. In addi-tion, patients can absorb glucose through the peritoneal dialysate, resulting in hypergly-cemia, not hypoglycemia. The resulting hyperglycemia can cause a hypertriglyceridemia,especially in patients with diabetes mellitus. Leakage of the dialysate ﬂuid into the pleuralspace can also occur, more frequently on the right than on the left. It can be diagnosed byanalysis of the pleural ﬂuid, which typically has an elevated glucose concentration. Rapidﬂuid shifts are uncommon with peritoneal dialysis, and this approach may be favored forpatients with congestive heart failure or unstable angina. A recent report suggested im-proved patient satisfaction with peritoneal dialysis compared with hemodialysis.
VII-17. The answer is A.   (Chap. 45)   The serum creatinine is widely used as a reﬂection of renal
function because metabolism of creatinine from muscle varies little in the steady state and itis a freely ﬁltered small solute. Therefore, creatinine clearance is used as a reﬂection of glo-merular ﬁltration rate. However, many factors such as loss of muscle from aging, chronicdisease, or malnutrition can mask signiﬁcant changes in creatinine clearance with smallchanges in serum creatinine. Two formulas, the Cockcroft-Gault formula and the MDRD(modiﬁcation of diet in renal disease), are often used to calculate creatinine clearance. TheCockcroft-Gault formula requires age, lean body weight, plasma creatinine, and sex to cal-culate the creatinine clearance. The more cumbersome and more accurate MDRD usesplasma creatinine, sex, race, and age. Urine creatinine is not a variable in either the Cock-croft-Gault or the MDRD formulas. Race is a variable only in the MDRD equation.
VII-18. The answer is B.   (Chap. 45)
Creatinine clearance = [(140 – age) × lean weight (kg)]/creatinine (mg/dL) × 72
Using the Cockcroft-Gault formula, this patient’s creatinine clearance is 47 mL/min. Thispatient would have moderate (stage 3) renal insufﬁciency. This information may be im-portant for drug dosing.
VII-19. The answer is D.   (Chap. 283)   Erythrocytosis can develop in an obstructive uropathy as
a result of increased erythropoietin production. Anemia in kidney disease occurs as a re-sult of progressive renal parenchymal destruction. As the kidney attempts to preserve re-nal function and expand blood volume, renin levels increase and can cause a secondaryhypertension. Dysuria can be seen in cases of chronic urinary tract obstruction due tourinary stasis and the propensity to develop urolithiasis. Pain with micturition is a hall-mark of vesicoureteral reﬂux, which causes a chronic functional obstructive uropathy.Pyuria is common, as is urinary tract infection. Stasis promotes the growth of bacteriaand urinary tract infection.
VII-20. The answer is D.   (Chap. 273)   Cholesterol embolization (also known as atheroembolic
renal disease) is characterized by pyuria, progressive renal failure (usually nonoliguric),and associated organ dysfunction (including bowel, pancreas, and CNS). Hypocomple-mentemia and eosinophiluria also may be seen. The urinalysis is not compatible withacute tubular necrosis because of the absence of granular casts.
VII-21. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 45 and 48)   The octahedral, or envelope-shaped, crystals are
due to the presence of calcium oxalate in the urine. Calcium oxalate crystals are classicallyseen in ethylene glycol ingestion, which also causes a high anion gap metabolic acidosis.White blood cell casts indicate an upper urinary tract infection associated with a positiveurine culture. Uric acid (rhomboid shapes) or struvite (“cofﬁn lids”) crystals may be seenin cases of nephrolithiasis that causes hydronephrosis. Red blood cell casts are indicativeof glomerular disease, often associated with a positive ANA.
298 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
VII-22. The answer is B.   (Chap. 48)   The pH is high and the plasma bicarbonate is high. This is
indicative of a metabolic alkalosis, not a primary acidosis. A respiratory alkalosis is not
consistent with an elevated P CO2. Similarly, the P CO2 is elevated appropriately to compen-
sate for the metabolic alkalosis, excluding a primary respiratory acidosis. The respiratorycompensation for a metabolic alkalosis is limited by the hypoxic drive. When the P
CO2
rises into the 40s and 50s, the hypoxic drive maintains a Pa O2 of >55–60 mmHg, prevent-
ing further hypoventilation to additionally increase P CO2.
VII-23. The answer is E.   (Chap. 48)   The differential diagnosis for a metabolic alkalosis can be di-
vided into those disorders with extracellular ﬂuid contraction and normotension (or hy-potension) and those with extracellular ﬂuid expansion and hypertension (see Table VII-23).Cushing’s disease and mineralocorticoid excess cause a metabolic alkalosis with hypertension.Patients with Bartter syndrome are normotensive. This patient has evidence of hypovolemiawith altered mental status, hypotension, and tachycardia. Myocardial infarction causing car-diogenic shock would result in an anion gap metabolic acidosis due to lactate accumulation.
T ABLE VII-23 Causes of Metabolic Acidois
I. Exogenous HCO 3− loads
A. Acute alkali administration
B. Milk-alkali syndrome
II. Effective ECFV contraction, normotension, K+ deﬁciency, and secondary hyperreninemic 
hyperaldosteronismA. Gastrointestinal origin
1. Vomiting2. Gastric aspiration3. Congenital chloridorrhea4. Villous adenoma
B. Renal origin
1. Diuretics2. Posthypercapnic state3. Hypercalcemia/hypoparathyroidism4. Recovery from lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis5. Nonreabsorbable anions including penicillin, carbenicillin6. Mg
2+ deﬁciency
7. K+ depletion
8. Bartter’s syndrome (loss of function mutations in TALH)9. Gitelman’s syndrome (loss of function mutation in Na
+-Cl− cotransporter in DCT)
III. ECFV expansion, hypertension, K+ deﬁciency, and mineralocorticoid excess
A. High renin
1. Renal artery stenosis2. Accelerated hypertension3. Renin-secreting tumor4. Estrogen therapy
B. Low renin
1. Primary aldosteronism
a. Adenomab. Hyperplasiac. Carcinoma
2. Adrenal enzyme defects
a. 11 β-Hydroxylase deﬁciencyb. 17 α-Hydroxylase deﬁciency
3. Cushing’s syndrome or disease4. Other
a. Licoriceb. Carbenoxolonec. Chewer’s tobacco
IV . Gain-of-function mutation of renal sodium channel with ECFV expansion, hypertension, 
K
+ deﬁciency, and hyporeninemic-hypoaldosteronism
A. Liddle’s syndrome 
Note:  ECFV, extracellular ﬂuid volume; TALH, thick ascending limb of Henle’s loop; DCT, distal convo-
luted tubule.
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 299
VII-24. The answer is D.   (Chap. 46)   This patient is most likely hypovolemic from the osmotic
preparation for his colonoscopy. Physical examination supports hypovolemic hyponatre-
mia. Hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia can cause hyponatremia, but these conditionswould be associated with a high and normal plasma osmolality, respectively. SIADH isunlikely to be causing the hyponatremia if the extracellular volume status is decreased.Diabetes insipidus is a hypernatremic disorder caused by excess water loss.
VII-25. The answer is B.   (Chap. 275)   Commonly accepted criteria for initiating patients on
maintenance dialysis include uremic symptoms, hyperkalemia unresponsive to conserva-tive measures, persistent extracellular ﬂuid expansion despite diuretic therapy, acidosisrefractory to medical therapy, a bleeding diathesis, and a creatinine clearance <10 mL/min per 1.73 m
2. This patient has none of those indications. Without symptoms of ure-
mia, an elevated BUN is not sufﬁcient to initiate maintenance dialysis. A urine analysis isunlikely to be helpful in deciding when to initiate dialysis for this patient. Renal biopsydoes not usually have a role in stage 5 disease.
VII-26. The answer is C.   (Chap. 47)   Determining the PTH level is central to the evaluation of
hypocalcemia (see Table VII-26). A suppressed or “inappropriately low” PTH level in thesetting of hypocalcemia establishes absent or reduced PTH secretion as the cause. Hypo-magnesemia may suppress PTH secretion and contribute to hypocalcemia. In contrast,an elevated PTH should direct attention to the vitamin D axis as the cause of hypocalce-mia. Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels will not elucidate the proximate cause of hypo-calcemia in the absence of PTH levels. In patients with suspected nutritional deﬁciency,the 25(OH)D should be checked. In patients with renal insufﬁciency or suspected vita-min D resistance, serum 1,25(OH)
2D levels are informative. An ionized calcium is a bet-
ter marker of the true serum calcium levels but will not assist with diagnosis.Hypomagnesemia should be repleted along with hypocalcemia when both are present.
T ABLE VII-26 Causes of Hypocalcemia
Low Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Hypoparathyroidism)
Parathyroid agenesis
Isolated
DiGeorge syndrome
Parathyroid destruction
SurgicalRadiationInﬁltration by metastases or systemic diseasesAutoimmune
Reduced parathyroid function
HypomagnesemiaActivating CaSR mutations
High Parathyroid Hormone Levels (Secondary Hyperparathyroidism)
Vitamin D deﬁciency or impaired 1,25(OH)
2D production/action
Nutritional vitamin D deﬁciency (poor intake or absorption)
Renal insufﬁciency with impaired 1,25(OH) 2D production
Vitamin D resistance, including receptor defects
Parathyroid hormone resistance syndromes
PTH receptor mutationsPseudohypoparathyroidism (G protein mutations)
Drugs
Calcium chelatorsInhibitors of bone resorption (bisphosphonates, plicamycin)Altered vitamin D metabolism (phenytoin, ketoconazole)
Miscellaneous causes
Acute pancreatitisAcute rhabdomyolysisHungry bone syndrome after parathyroidectomyOsteoblastic metastases with marked stimulation of bone formation (prostate cancer)
Note:  CaSR, calcium sensor receptor; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
300 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
VII-27. The answer is A.   (Chap. 45)   A key point in the diagnostic evaluation of hematuria is
the presence of dysmorphic RBCs or RBC casts in the urine. This ﬁnding is strongly sus-
picious for glomerulonephritis. This diagnosis requires prompt evaluation and therapyto avoid irreversible renal failure. Concerning aspects of this patient’s presentation forglomerulonephritis are the presence of RBC casts and >500 mg/24 h of protein in theurine. In the evaluation of proteinuria with hematuria, these features should prompt aserologic and hematologic evaluation and strong consideration of renal biopsy. A CTscan is unlikely to reveal the cause of this patient’s hematuria because he has a glomerularproblem. An ACE inhibitor may treat his proteinuria but will not address the underlyingcause. Since it is already apparent that this patient has proteinuria, ultrasensitive testingfor microalbumin is not necessary. Cystoscopy is performed when the source of bleedingis thought to be from the bladder, after renal sources have been eliminated as causes.
VII-28. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 46 and 278)   The evaluation of patients with hypokalemia
should ﬁrst include a consideration of redistribution of body potassium into cells such asthat which occurs in alkalosis, β
2-agonist excess with refeeding syndrome and/or insulin
therapy, vitamin B 12 therapy, pernicious anemia, and periodic paralysis. In periodic pa-
ralysis serum bicarbonate is normal. If the patient is hypertensive and plasma renin is el-evated, renovascular hypertension or a renin-secreting tumor (including Wilms) must beconsidered and appropriate imaging studies must be carried out. If plasma renin levelsare low, mineralocorticoid effect may be high as a result of either endogenous hormone(glucocorticoid overproduction or aldosterone overproduction as in Conn’s syndrome)or exogenous agents (licorice or steroids). In a normotensive patient a high serum bicar-bonate excludes renal tubular acidosis. High urine chloride excretion makes gastrointes-tinal losses less likely and implies primary renal potassium loss, as may be seen in diureticabuse (ruled out by the urine screen) or Bartter’s syndrome. In Bartter’s syndrome, hy-perplasia of the granular cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus leads to high renin levelsand secondary aldosterone elevations. Such hyperplasia appears to be secondary tochronic volume depletion caused by a hereditary (autosomal recessive) defect that inter-feres with salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle. Chronic potassium de-pletion, which frequently presents initially in childhood, leads to polyuria and weakness.
VII-29. The answer is E.   (Chap. 49)   The presence of unchanged nocturnal tumescence sug-
gests psychogenic factors as the cause of the patient’s erectile dysfunction (ED). Noctur-nal tumescence occurs during REM sleep, and intact neurologic and circulatory systemsare necessary for this to occur. Erectile dysfunction is reported in 52% of men betweenages 40 and 70. The incidence of ED is higher in men with diabetes mellitus, heart dis-ease, and hypertension and in tobacco users. Additionally, medications are frequently in-volved, especially many antihypertensive agents, including beta blockers, thiazidediuretics, calcium channel blockers, and angiotensin converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibi-tors. A thorough history and physical examination with limited laboratory testing usuallyyields the appropriate diagnosis.
VII-30. The answer is C.   (Chap. 278)   Polycystic kidney diseases are the most common life-
threatening inherited diseases. Adult-onset disease is typically inherited in autosomaldominant fashion. It is a systemic disease caused by mutations in either the PKD-1 or
PKD-2 gene. Phenotypic presentation is varied. Most patients are not symptomatic untilmiddle age. Typical presentations include abdominal discomfort, hematuria, urinarytract infections, or hypertension. Most patients experience a steady decline in renal func-tion over one to two decades following diagnosis. About 60% of patients will developend-stage renal disease by age 70. Hypertension precedes renal failure. Risk factors fordisease progression include male gender, African-American race, hypertension, and thepresence of the polycystin-1 mutation. Patients are at an increased risk of subarachnoidand cerebral hemorrhage due to aneurysm formation. Cardiac abnormalities are presentin 25% of patients, and most commonly include mitral valve prolapse and aortic regurgi-tation. Hepatic cysts are common and are found in 40% of patients by the age of 60. Re-nal ultrasound is the diagnostic test of choice and is 100% sensitive in patients older than
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 301
30 who have a positive family history. Treatment of PCKD is supportive; control of hy-
pertension and close evaluation of kidney function are paramount.
VII-31. The answer is A.   (Chap. 283; Ifudu: N Engl J Med 339:1054–1062, 1998.)   Renal osteo-
dystrophy is a common complication of chronic renal disease and the most commoncomplication secondary to impaired renal production of 1,25(OH)
2D3. This leads to a
decreased calcium absorption in the gut as well as impaired renal phosphate excretion.The resulting hyperphosphatemia causes a secondary hyperparathyroidism. The hyper-parathyroidism is subsequently worsened by hypocalcemia, which is present because ofthe hyperphosphatemia and the decreased enzymatic conversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin Dto 1,25(OH)
2D3. Finally, 1,25(OH) 2D3 deﬁciency worsens hyperparathyroidism as the
former is a direct inhibitor of parathyroid hormone secretion into the bone. The resul-tant decreased serum calcium concentration leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism. Inaddition, other causes of renal osteodystrophy include chronic metabolic acidosis result-ing from dissolution of bone buffers and decalciﬁcation and the long-term administra-tion of aluminum-containing antacids. No signiﬁcant loss of vitamin D or calcium isassociated with currently employed dialysis techniques, and the treatment of renal os-teodystrophy often includes calcitriol.
VII-32. The answer is C.   (Chap. 46)   Diuretic-induced hyponatremia almost always is due to
thiazide diuretics. It occurs mostly in the elderly. The reduction in serum sodium may besevere and cause symptoms. Loop diuretics such as furosemide cause hyponatremia farless often than do thiazide diuretics. Thiazide diuretics inhibit sodium and potassium re-absorption in the distal tubule, leading to Na
+ and K+ depletion and A VP-mediated water
retention. In contrast, loop diuretics impair maximal urinary concentrating capacity,limiting A VP-mediated water retention. Many drugs may cause hyponatremia by pro-moting A VP secretion or action at the collecting duct; however, metoprolol and enalaprilare not signiﬁcant causes of SIADH. Spironolactone is a competitive antagonist of aldos-terone at the mineralocorticoid receptor. It has weak natriuretic activity and is most likelyto cause hyperkalemia.
VII-33. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 46 and 334)   Failure to concentrate urine despite substantial
hypertonic dehydration suggests a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus. A nephrogenic originwill be postulated if there is no increase in urine concentration after exogenous vaso-pressin. The only useful mode of therapy is a low-salt diet and the use of a thiazide oramiloride, a potassium-sparing distal diuretic agent. The resultant volume contractionpresumably enhances proximal reabsorption and thereby reduces urine ﬂow.
VII-34. The answer is A.   (Chap. 279)   Individuals with acute leukemia and other myeloprolifer-
ative disorders are at risk for the development of tumor lysis syndrome following institi-tution of chemotherapy. Tumor lysis syndrome results from rapid cell death withresultant increases in serum potassium, phosphate, and uric acid levels. Renal failure de-velops due to acute uric acid nephropathy, and pathology demonstrates deposition ofuric acid crystals in the kidneys and the collecting system. The clinical picture is one ofrapidly progressive renal failure, with oliguria and rapidly rising creatinine. Markedly el-evated levels of serum uric acid would be expected in acute uric acid nephropathy, buthyperuricemia occurs in any cause of renal failure. A urine uric acid/creatinine ratio of>1 mg/mg conﬁrms hyperuricemia and uric acid nephropathy as the cause of renal fail-ure. This complication can largely be prevented by institution of allopurinol, 200–800 mgdaily, prior to chemotherapy. Once hyperuricemia develops, however, efforts should befocused on preventing deposition of uric acid in the kidney. These measures includeforced diuresis with furosemide or mannitol and alkalination of the urine with sodiumbicarbonate. Dialysis may be required. Colchicine is used to treat the inﬂammation inacute gouty arthritis but has no effects on serum uric acid levels. It has no role in thetreatment of uric acid nephropathy. Prednisone may be used in the chemotherapeuticregimens of some individuals with hematologic malignancies, but does not prevent de-velopment of hyperuricemia.
302 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
VII-35. The answer is A.   (Chap. 48)   Since the pH is low, the primary process is an acidosis. A
low serum bicarbonate tells us that it is a metabolic acidosis. The anion gap [Na – (Cl +
HCO 3–)] is between 8 and 12 meq/L. In this example, the anion gap is elevated to 31
meq/L. The P CO2 decreases from a normal of 40 mmHg by 1 to 1.5 for each 1-meq de-
crease in serum bicarbonate. In this example, the serum bicarbonate has decreased by 19meq/L (normal is 24 meq/L) and the expected P
CO2 is between 11.5 and 21 mmHg. This
is an example of an anion-gap metabolic acidosis with appropriate respiratory compen-sation. Respiratory acidosis is ruled out by the low P
CO2. If this patient had a concomi-
tant respiratory alkalosis, the P CO2 would be lower.
VII-36. The answer is B.   (Chap. 275)   Although the dose is currently deﬁned as a derivation of
the fractional urea clearance, factors that are also important include patient size, residualkidney function, dietary protein intake, comorbid conditions, and the degree of anabo-lism/catabolism. The efﬁciency of dialysis depends on the counter-current ﬂow rate ofthe dialysate. The number of hours/sessions prescribed for a patient are derived from thedialysis dose and is individualized.
VII-37. The answer is A.   (Chap. 280)   The prognosis for patients with scleroderma renal dis-
ease is poor. In SRC patients prompt treatment with an ACE inhibitor may reverse acuterenal failure. In recent studies the initiation of ACE inhibitor therapy resulted in 61% ofpatients having some degree of renal recovery and not needing chronic dialysis support.The survival rate is estimated to be 80 to 85% at 8 years. Among patients who needed di-alysis, when treated with ACE inhibitors, over 50% were able to discontinue dialysis after3 to 18 months. Therefore, ACE inhibitors should be used even if the patient requires di-alysis support.
VII-38. The answer is A.   (Chap. 275)   The potassium concentration of dialysate is usually 2.5
meq/L but may be varied depending on the predialysis serum potassium. This patientmay need a lower dialysate potassium concentration. Sodium modeling is an adjustmentof the dialysate sodium that may lessen the incidence of hypotension at the end of a dial-ysis session. Aldosterone defects, if present, are not likely to play a role in this patientsince his kidneys are not being perfused. Therefore, nephrectomy is not likely to controlhis potassium. Similarly, since the patient is likely anuric, there is no efﬁcacy in utilizingloop diuretics to effect kaluresis. This patient has no approved indications for implanta-tion of a deﬁbrillator.
VII-39. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 46 and 334)   Rapid correction (or overcorrection) of hypona-
tremia may lead to the development of the osmotic demyelination syndrome. The relativehypertonicity of the extracellular ﬂuid without time for intracellular compensation or os-motic compensation causes osmotic shrinkage of brain cells and demyelination. Thissyndrome usually occurs in patients with chronic hyponatremia who have osmoticallyequilibrated the intracellular space. These patients have ﬂaccid paralysis, dysarthria, anddysphagia. Brain MRI will show demyelination, particularly in the brainstem (centralpontine myelinolysis). Head CT scans will not demonstrate these lesions. The presence ofbilateral extremity with minimal cranial nerve abnormalities would make a posterior cir-culation stroke less likely
VII-40. The answer is C.   (Chap. 45)   It is important to note that nephrotic syndrome with any
cause can be associated with hypercoagulability. Antithrombin III and proteins C and Sare lost in the urine, with concomitantly decreased serum levels. Increased platelet aggre-gration has been described, and hyperﬁbrinogenemia is thought to result from an inﬂam-matory response and increased liver synthetic activity caused by urinary protein losses.Additionally, IgG is lost in the urine, and occasionally these patients develop low serumlevels with associated immunocompromise. Chronic disseminated intravascular coagula-tion is not a mechanism of hypercoagulability in patients with the nephrotic syndrome.
VII-41. The answer is A.   (Chap. 273)   Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) do not
alter glomerular ﬁltration rate in normal individuals. However, in states of mild to mod-
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 303
erate hypoperfusion (as in prerenal azotemia) or in the presence of chronic kidney dis-
ease, glomerular perfusion and ﬁltration fraction are preserved through severalcompensatory mechanisms. In response to a reduction in perfusion pressures, stretch re-ceptors in afferent arterioles trigger a cascade of events that lead to afferent arteriolar di-latation and efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, thereby preserving glomerular ﬁltrationfraction. These mechanisms are partly mediated by the vasodilators prostaglandin E
2 and
prostacyclin. NSAIDs can impair the kidney’s ability to compensate for a low perfusionpressure by interfering with local prostaglandin synthesis and inhibiting these protectiveresponses. Ureteral obstruction is not the mechanism by which NSAID impairs renalfunction in this scenario. NSAIDs are not known to be proximal tubule toxins.
VII-42.  and.  VII-43.  The answers are A and A.   (Chap. 273; R Solomon: Kidney Int 53:230, 1998.)
Radiocontrast agents are a common cause of acute renal failure and may result in acutetubular necrosis (contrast nephropathy). It is common for patients receiving intravenouscontrast to develop a transient increase in serum creatinine. These agents cause renal fail-ure by inducing intrarenal vasoconstriction and reducing renal blood ﬂow, mimickingprerenal azotemia, and by directly causing tubular injury. The risk of contrast nephropa-thy may be reduced by initiating newer isoosmolar agents and minimizing the dose ofcontrast. When the reduction in renal blood ﬂow is severe or prolonged, tubular injurydevelops, causing acute renal failure. Patients with intravascular volume depletion, diabe-tes, congestive heart failure, multiple myeloma, or chronic renal failure have an increasedrisk of contrast nephropathy. The urine sediment is bland in mild cases, but with acutetubular necrosis, muddy brown granular casts may be seen. Saline hydration plus N-ace-
tylcysteine may decrease the risk and severity of contrast nephropathy. Red cell casts indi-cate glomerular disease, and white cell casts suggest upper urinary tract infection.Urinary eosinophils are seen in allergic interstitial disease caused by many drugs.
VII-44. The answer is C.   (Chap. 280)   Renal vein thrombosis occurs in 10 to 15% of patients
with nephrotic syndrome accompanying membranous glomerulopathy and oncologicdisease. The clinical manifestations can be variable but may be characterized by fever,lumbar tenderness, leukocytosis, and hematuria. Magnetic resonance venography is themost sensitive and speciﬁc noninvasive form of imaging to make the diagnosis of renalvein thrombosis. Ultrasound with Doppler is operator-dependent and therefore may beless sensitive. Contrast venography is the gold standard for diagnosis, but it exposes thepatient to a more invasive procedure and contrast load. Nuclear medicine screening isnot performed to make this diagnosis.
VII-45. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 46 and 334)   Arginine vasopressin is a neurohormone re-
leased from the posterior pituitary gland to help maintain water balance in the body. Alsoknown as antidiuretic hormone, vasopressin is primarily released under conditions ofhyperosmolarity and volume depletion. Although sodium is the main determinant of hy-perosmolarity, sodium is not the only stimulus that affects the secretion of vasopressin.Other, less potent stimuli of vasopressin release include pregnancy, nausea, pain, stress,and hypoglycemia. In addition, many drugs can cause stimulation of the inappropriateTABLE VII-42, -43 Guidelines for Use of Intravenous Contrast in Patients with Impaired 
Renal Function
Serum Creatinine, 
µmol/L (mg/dL)aRecommendation
<133 (<1.5) Use either ionic or nonionic at 2 mL/kg to 150 mL total
133–177 (1.5–2.0) Nonionic; hydrate diabetics 1 mL/kg per hour × 10h
>177 (>2.0) Consider noncontrast CT or MRI; nonionic contrast if required
177–221 (2.0–2.5) Nonionic only if required (as above); contraindicated in diabetics
>265 (>3.0) Nonionic IV contrast given only to patients undergoing dialysis 
within 24 h
aRisk is greatest in patients with rising creatinine levels.
Note:  CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
304 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
secretion of vasopressin. This hormone acts on the principal cell in the distal convoluted
tubule of the kidney to cause resorption of water. This occurs through nuclear mecha-nisms encoded by the aquaporin-2 gene that cause water channels to be inserted into theluminal membrane. The net effect is to cause the passive resorption of water along the os-motic gradient in the distal convoluted tubule.
VII-46. The answer is C.   (Chap. 46)   β-Adrenergic agonists such as those used to treat bron-
chospasm are a common cause of hypokalemia. Activation of β
2-adrenergic receptors in-
duces cellular uptake of potassium and promotes insulin secretion by pancreatic islet β
cells. Clinical manifestations include fatigue, myalgias and muscular weakness. Severe hy-pokalemia leads to progressive weakness, hypoventilation and eventually complete paral-ysis. The electrocardiogram ﬁndings are common but do not correlate with the degree ofhypokalemia in the serum. T odd’s paralysis occurs after seizures. Neither myocardial in-farction with failure nor ICU psychosis would present with objective lower extremityweakness without other more common indicators of these conditions. Adrenal insufﬁ-ciency will generally cause hyperkalemia, not hypokalemia.
VII-47. The answer is C.   (Chap. 46)   In addition to correction of hypernatremia, patients such
as this who are volume-depleted require restoration of extracellular ﬂuid volume. Thequantity of water required to correct a free water deﬁcit in hypernatremic patients can beestimated from the following equation:
Water deﬁcit = [(plasma Na – 140)/140] × total body water
T otal body water is approximately 50% of lean body mass in men and 40% of lean bodymass in women. In calculating the rate of water replacement, ongoing losses should beaccounted for and plasma Na
+ should be lowered by no more than 0.5 meq/L an hour
over the ﬁrst 24 h. More rapid administration of water and normalization of serum so-dium concentration may result in a rapid inﬂux of water into cells that have already un-dergone osmotic normalization. The resulting cellular edema in the central nervoussystem (CNS) may cause seizures or neurologic damage.
VII-48. The answer is E.   (Chap. 279)   The most likely cause of acute renal failure in this patient
is allergic interstitial nephritis (AIN) due to penicillin. Many drugs can cause AIN includ-ingβ-lactams, sulfonamides, ﬂuoroquinolones, thiazide and loop diuretics, nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors. Most in-dividuals have been taking the culprit drug for several weeks before the development ofAIN and present with fevers, rash, and eosinophilia. This triad is present in only 10% ofpatients, however. Examination of the urine sediment shows hematuria and eosinophilia.Urine eosinophils can be seen with the use of a Hansel’s stain. Proteinuria is usually mildexcept in cases where AIN is due to NSAIDs or COX-2 inhibitors, and 24-h urine collec-tion for protein would be nonspeciﬁc. Renal imaging may suggest enlarged kidneys, andhistology would show interstitial edema with inﬁltration of large numbers of inﬂamma-tory cells including eosinophils, lymphocytes, and PMNs. The main differential diagnosisis acute glomerulonephritis, but if an individual is on a culprit drug, the drug should bediscontinued as an initial step. Discontinuation of the drug usually leads to complete re-versal of the renal injury, although in severe cases, prednisone may be used to improve re-covery. The clinical picture does not suggest relapse of endocarditis, worsening valvulardysfunction, or new infectious process such as a infection of the central venous catheter.Thus, blood cultures and echocardiogram are not useful in this situation. Antistreptol-ysin O titers are elevated in cases of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis due to group Astreptococcus, but would not be elevated in S. viridans  endocarditis.
VII-49. The answer is C.   (Chap. 275)   Hypotension is the most common complication during
hemodialysis. The risk factors for developing hypotension during hemodialysis include ex-cessive ultraﬁltration, reduced intravascular volume before dialysis, impaired autonomicresponses, osmolar shifts, food intake before dialysis, impaired cardiac function, and use ofantihypertensive agents. The hypotension is usually managed with ﬂuid administration andby decreasing the ultraﬁltration rate. Muscle cramps are a decreasingly common complica-
VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS 305
tion of hemodialysis as a result of improvements in dialysis technique. Anaphylactoid reac-
tions to the dialyzer once were common but are also decreasing in frequency with the use ofnewer-generation dialysis membranes. Fever is not a usual complication of hemodialysisbut suggests the presence of an infection of the dialysis access site. Blood cultures should beobtained. Hyperglycemia is a complication of peritoneal dialysis, not of hemodialysis.
VII-50. The answer is A.   (Chap. 47)   Hypercalcemia causes characteristic changes on the ECG
including bradycardia, atrioventricular block, and a shortened QT interval. Symptoms ofhypercalcemia depend on the severity and time course of its development. Mild hypercal-cemia is usually asymptomatic. Patients may progress to complain of vague neuropsychi-atric symptoms including trouble concentrating, personality changes, and depression.Severe hypercalcemia, particularly if it develops acutely, may result in lethargy, stupor, orcoma. Changes on the ECG of hypokalemia would include prominent U waves and aprolonged QU interval. Hyperkalemia acutely shows prominent T waves and PR depres-sion. Hypocalcemia causes a prolongation of the QT interval.
VII-51. The answer is A.   (Chap. 47)   In sarcoidosis, similar to other granulomatous diseases such
as tuberculosis and silicosis, there is increased conversion of 25(OH)D to the potent 1,25(OH)
2D. 1,25(OH) 2D enhances intestinal calcium absorption, resulting in hypercalce-
mia and suppressed parathyroid hormone. Glucocorticoids decrease 1,25(OH) 2D produc-
tion. Initial treatment for this patient should include IV ﬂuids to restore extracellular ﬂuidvolume. Only after volume has been restored should loop diuretics be used to decrease se-rum calcium. Zoledronic acid is indicated if there is increased calcium mobilization frombone, as in malignancy or severe hyperparathyroidism. Intravenous phosphate is not indi-cated as it chelates calcium and may deposit in tissue and cause extensive organ damage ifthe calcium-phosphate product is >65. The mechanism of the hypercalcemia of sarcoidosisis related to excess vitamin D, therefore calcitriol would be contraindicated.
VII-52. The answer is C.   (Chap. 273)   In bilateral renal artery stenosis (or unilateral stenosis in
a patient with a single kidney), GFR is preserved by the actions of angiotensin II: afferentarteriolar vasodilatation and efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction. Angiotensin-convertingenzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers blunt these responses and canprecipitate acute renal failure in this setting. Thiazide diuretics, calcium channel blockers,or centrally acting alphablockers are better choices for an antihypertensive agent in a pa-tient with bilateral renal artery stenosis.
VII-53. The answer is B.   (Chap. 275)   In peritoneal dialysis, 1.5–3.0 L of dextrose-containing
ﬂuid is allowed to dwell in the peritoneum to remove toxic materials and volume. Factorssuch as infection, drugs, position, and exercise impact solute and water clearance. In thedeveloped world, hemodialysis is often the preferred method for renal replacement for pa-tients. However, in poorer countries where access to hemodialysis centers is limited, peri-toneal dialysis is used more commonly. Residual renal function alters the dose of dialysisbut does not impact the mode of dialysis. Moreover, patients with no residual renal func-tion who receive peritoneal dialysis are at higher risk of uremia than patients on hemodial-ysis. High-transporters through the peritoneum require more frequent doses of peritonealdialysis, potentially negating the beneﬁt of this modality. In the developed world, the pa-tient’s age does not impact the mode of dialysis. Patients with prior abdominal surgeriesoften have difﬁculty with peritoneal dialysis catheter placement and dialysate delivery.
VII-54. The answer is A.   (Chap. 278)   This patient has a normal anion gap metabolic acidosis (an-
ion gap = 12). The calculated urine anion gap (Na
+ + K+– Cl–) is +3; thus, the acidosis is un-
likely to be due to gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss. In this patient the diagnosis is type I renaltubular acidosis, or distal RTA. This is a disorder in which the distal nephron does not lowerpH normally. It is associated with a urine pH >5.5, hypokalemia, and lack of bicarbonaturia.This condition may be associated with calcium phosphate stones and nephrocalcinosis. TypeII RTA, or proximal RTA, includes a pH <5.5, hypokalemia, a positive urine anion gap, bicar-binaturia, hypophosphatemia, and hypercalciuria. This condition results from defective re-sorption of bicarbonate. Type III RTA is rare and most commonly is seen in children. Type IV
306 VII. D ISORDERS OF THE  URINARY AND  KIDNEY  TRACT  — ANSWERS
RTA is also referred to as hyperkalemic distal RTA. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is the
most common cause of type IV RTA and is usually associated with diabetic nephropathy.
VII-55. The answer is B.   (Chap. 277)   The characteristic pattern of focal (not all glomeruli) and
segmental (not the entire glomerulus) glomerular scarring is shown. The history and labora-tory features are also consistent with this lesion: some associated hypertension, diminution increatinine clearance, and a relatively inactive urine sediment. The “nephropathy of obesity”may be associated with this lesion secondary to hyperﬁltration; this condition may be morelikely to occur in obese patients with hypoxemia, obstructive sleep apnea, and right-sidedheart failure. Hypertensive nephrosclerosis exhibits more prominent vascular changes andpatchy, ischemic, totally sclerosed glomeruli. In addition, nephrosclerosis seldom is associatedwith nephrotic-range proteinuria. Minimal-change disease usually is associated with sympto-matic edema and normal-appearing glomeruli as demonstrated on light microscopy. This pa-tient’s presentation is consistent with that of membranous nephropathy, but the biopsy is not.With membranous glomerular nephritis all glomeruli are uniformly involved with subepithe-lial dense deposits. There are no features of crescentic glomerulonephritis present.
VII-56. The answer is D.   (Chap. 46)   This patient has a reduction in extracellular ﬂuid (ECF)
volume as evidenced by the resting tachycardia and orthostatic fall in blood pressure. Inresponse (to maintain ECF volume), there is renal arteriolar vasoconstriction that causesa decrease in the glomerular ﬁltration rate and ﬁltered sodium. Tubular reabsorption ofsodium increases as a result of the decreased ﬁltered load and the effects of angiotensin II.These changes result in low (<20 meq/L) urine sodium excretion. There will also be anincrease  in the ratio of BUN to creatinine because of increased BUN reabsorption. As a
result of the effects of aldosterone and the avid sodium reabsorption, urine potassiumwill be higher than urine sodium. Sweat is hypotonic relative to serum, and so patientswith excessive sweating are more likely to be hypernatremic than hyponatremic. Redblood cell casts indicate glomerular disease. Prolonged hypotension caused by ECF con-traction may cause tubular injury, leading to granular or epithelial cell casts.
VII-57. The answer is B.   (Chap. 45)   The patient’s polyuria and thirst with rising sodium sug-
gest diabetes insipidus. Although primary polydipsia can present similarly with thirst andpolyuria, it does not cause hypernatremia; instead, hyponatremia results from increasedextracellular water. Often patients with diabetes insipidus are able to compensate as out-patients when they have ready access to free water, but once hospitalized and unable toreceive water freely, they develop hypernatremia. The ﬁrst step in the evaluation of diabe-tes insipidus is to determine if it is central or nephrogenic. This is easily accomplishedthrough measurement of the vasopressin level. In central diabetes inspidus it is low be-cause of a failure of secretion from the posterior pituitary gland, whereas it is elevated innephrogenic disease, in which the kidneys are insensitive to vasopressin. After measure-ment of the vasopressin level, a trial of nasal arginine vasopressin may be attempted.Generally nephrogenic diabetes inspidus will not improve signiﬁcantly with this drug.Free water restriction, which will help with primary polydipsia, will cause worsening hy-pernatremia in patients with diabetes insipidus. Serum osmolality and 24-h urinary so-dium excretion will not help in the diagnosis or management of this patient at this time.
VII-58. The answer is D.   (Chap. 278)   In any patient with hypokalemia the use of diuretics must
be excluded. This patient has multiple warning signs for the use of agents to alter herweight, including her age, gender, and participation in competitive sports. Her BMI is low,and the oral examination may suggest chronic vomiting. Chronic vomiting may be associ-ated with a low urine chloride level. Once diuretic use and vomiting are excluded, the dif-ferential diagnosis of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis includes magnesium deﬁciency,Liddle’s syndrome, Bartter’s syndrome, and Gittleman’s syndrome. Liddle’s syndrome is as-sociated with hypertension and undetectable aldosterone and renin levels. It is a rare auto-somal dominant disorder. Classic Bartter’s syndrome has a presentation similar to that ofthis patient. It may also include polyuria and nocturia because of hypokalemia-induced di-abetes insipidus. Gittleman’s syndrome can be distinguished from Bartter’s syndrome byhypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria.
307VIII. DISORDERS OF THE 
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best  response to each question.
VIII-1.    A 46-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for
upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. He has a known his-
tory of peptic ulcer disease, for which he takes a proton-pump inhibitor. His last admission for upper GI bleedingwas 4 years ago. After ﬂuid resuscitation, he is hemody-namically stable and his hematocrit has not changed inthe past 8 h. Upper endoscopy is performed. Which of thefollowing ﬁndings at endoscopy is most reassuring thatthe patient will not have a signiﬁcant rebleeding episodewithin the next 3 days?
A. Adherent clot on ulcer
B. Clean-based ulcerC. Gastric ulcer with arteriovenous malformationsD. Visible bleeding vesselE. Visible nonbleeding vessel
VIII-2.    Which of the following statements about alcoholic
liver disease is not true?
A. Pathologically, alcoholic cirrhosis is often character-
ized by diffuse ﬁne scarring with small regenerativenodules.
B. The ratio of AST to ALT is often higher than 2.C. Serum aspartate aminotransferase levels are often
greater than 1000 U/L.
D. Concomitant hepatitis C signiﬁcantly accelerates the
development of alcoholic cirrhosis.
E. Serum prothrombin times may be prolonged, but
activated partial thromboplastin times are usuallynot affected.
VIII-3.    A 47-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room with severe mid-abdominal pain radiating toher back. The pain began acutely and is sharp. She de-nies cramping or ﬂatulence. She has had two episodesof emesis of bilious material since the pain began, butthis has not lessened the pain. She currently rates thepain as a 10 out of 10 and feels the pain is worse in thesupine position. For the past few months, she has hadintermittent episodes of right upper and mid-epigas-tric pain that occur after eating but subside over a fewhours. These are associated with a feeling of excessgas. She denies any history of alcohol abuse. She hasno medical history of hypertension or hyperlipid-emia. On physical examination, she is writhing in dis-tress and slightly diaphoretic. Vital signs are: heartrate 127 beats/min, blood pressure 92/50 mmHg, res-piratory rate 20 breaths/min, temperature 37.9°C,Sa
O2 88% on room air. Her body mass index is 29 kg/
m2. The cardiovascular examination reveals a regular
tachycardia. The chest examination shows dullness topercussion at bilateral bases with a few scatteredcrackles. On abdominal examination, bowel soundsare hypoactive. There is no rash or bruising evidenton inspection of the abdomen. There is voluntaryguarding on palpation. The pain with palpation isgreatest in the periumbilical and epigastric area with-out rebound tenderness. There is no evidence of jaun-dice, and the liver span is about 10 cm to percussion.Amylase level is 750 IU/L, and lipase level is 1129 IU/L.Other laboratory values include: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 168 U/L, alanine aminotransferase(ALT) 196 U/L, total bilirubin 2.3 mg/dL, alkalinephosphatase level 268 U/L, lactate dehydrogenaseLDH 300 U/L, and creatinine 1.9 mg/dL. The hemato-crit is 43%, and white blood cell (WBC) count is11,500/µ L with 89% neutrophils. An arterial blood
gas shows a pH of 7.32, Pa
CO2 32 mmHg, and a Pa O2 of
56 mmHg. An ultrasound conﬁrms a dilated commonbile duct with evidence of pancreatitis manifested asan edematous and enlarged pancreatitis. A CT scanshows no evidence of necrosis. After 3 L of normal sa-line, her blood pressure comes up to 110/60 mmHgwith a heart rate of 105 beats/min. Which of the fol-lowing statements best describes the pathophysiologyof this disease?
A. Intrapancreatic activation of digestive enzymes with
autodigestion and acinar cell injury
B. Chemoattraction of neutrophils with subsequent
inﬁltration and inﬂammationVIII-3. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
308 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
C. Distant organ involvement and systemic inﬂamma-
tory response syndrome related to release of acti-
vated pancreatic enzymes and cytokines
D. All of the above
VIII-4.    In the case vignette presented above, which of the
following factors at presentation predicts a poor outcomeand increased risk of death in acute pancreatitis?
A. Body mass index (BMI) >25 kg/m
2
B. Hematocrit ≥40%
C. Lipase >1000 IU/L
D. Pa O2 <60 mmHg
E. WBC count >10,000/ µL
VIII-5.    A 22-year old woman presents to the emergency de-
partment with abdominal pain and malaise. Her symp-toms began about 8 h prior to presentation, and she hasno diarrhea. The pain is mostly in the right ﬂank cur-rently but began in the periumbilical area. She has nauseaand vomiting. T emperature is 100.3°C, blood pressure129/90 mmHg, heart rate 101 beats/min. Physical exami-nation shows only mild diffuse abdominal tenderness.The abdomen is soft and bowel sounds are diminished.She is tender in the right ﬂank without costovertebral an-gle tenderness. The genitourinary and pelvic examina-tions are normal. White blood cell count is 10,000/ µL.
Urine analysis shows 2 white blood cells per high pow-ered ﬁeld, no epithelial cells, and 1 red blood cell per highpowered ﬁeld. A serum pregnancy test is negative. She hasno past medical history and has never had similar symp-toms. She is not sexually active. Which of the following isthe most likely diagnosis?
A. Abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture
B. Acute appendicitisC. PyelonephritisD. Mesenteric lymphadenitisE. Pelvic inﬂammatory disease
VIII-6.    A 28-year-old male with HIV and a CD4 count of
4/µL is admitted to the hospital with several days of epigas-
tric boring abdominal pain radiating to the back with asso-ciated nausea and bilious vomiting. He has a historyof disseminated mycobacterial disease, cryptococcalpneumonia, and injection drug use. His current medica-tions include ﬂuconazole, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,clarithromycin, ethambutol, and rifabutin. On physical ex-amination he has normal vital signs, decreased bowelsounds, and tender epigastrium without rebound or guard-ing. Rectal exam is guaiac-negative. The remainder of theexamination is normal. Amylase and lipase are elevated.The patient is treated conservatively with intravenous ﬂuidsand bowel rest, with resolution of symptoms. Right upperquadrant ultrasound is normal, and calcium and triglycer-ides are normal. Which of the following changes to hismedical regimen should be recommended on discharge?A. Discontinue rifabutin.B. Substitute azithromycin for clarithromycin.C. Substitute dapsone for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxa-
zole.
D. Substitute amphotericin for ﬂuconazole.E. Discontinue trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
VIII-7.   All of the following necessitate sending bacterial
stool cultures in patients with diarrhea for 2 days severeenough to keep them home from work except
A. age >75B. bloody stoolsC. dehydrationD. recent lung transplantationE. temperature >38.5°C
VIII-8.   While doing rounds in the intensive care unit,
you see a 70-year-old male patient with multisystem or-gan failure who is postoperative day 3. Review of hishistory reveals that he had a perforated appendix due toa delay in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Prior tohis surgical intervention, he was noted to be delirious.His preoperative laboratory results showed: sodium,133 meq/dL, potassium, 5.2 meq/dL, chloride, 98 meq/dL, bicarbonate, 14 meq/dL, blood urea nitrogen 85mg/dL, creatinine, 3.2 mg/dL. Urine analysis had nored cells, white cells, and trace protein. An electrocar-diogram showed ST-segment depression in an area ofan old myocardial infarct. Preoperative troponin I levelwas 0.09 mg/dL. He had no history of chronic renal in-sufﬁciency. What is the most likely etiology of this pa-tient’s renal failure?
A. Acute interstitial nephritis
B. Congestive heart failureC. GlomerulonephritisD. Ureteral injuryE. Volume depletion
VIII-9.   All the following are causes of diarrhea except
A. diabetesB. hypercalcemiaC. hyperthyroidismD. irritable bowel syndromeE. metoclopramide
VIII-10.   A 55-year-old white male with a history of dia-
betes presents to your ofﬁce with complaints of gen-eralized weakness, weight loss, nonspeciﬁc diffuseabdominal pain, and erectile dysfunction. The examina-
tion is signiﬁcant for hepatomegaly without tender ness,
testicular atrophy, and gynecomastia. Skin exam ination
shows a diffuse slate-gray hue slightly more pronouncedon the face and neck. Joint examination shows mildswelling of the second and third metacarpophalangealVIII-6. (Continued) VIII-3. (Continued)
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 309
joints on the right hand. What is the recommended test
for diagnosis?
A. Serum ferritin
B. Serum iron studies, including transferrin saturationC. Urinary iron quantiﬁcation in 24-h collectionD. Genetic screen for HFE  gene mutation (C282Y and
H63D)
E. Liver biopsy
VIII-11.    All the following are associated with an increased
risk for cholelithiasis except
A. chronic hemolytic anemiaB. obesityC. high-protein dietD. pregnancyE. female sex
VIII-12.    A 28-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with
a large perianal abscess. He is taken to the operating roomfor incision and drainage, which he tolerates well, and he isdischarged home with a 2-week course of antibiotics. Hereturns to the hospital 2 months later for a rash on hisshins. On examination, he has discrete red swollen noduleson both of his shins without ﬂuctuance. They measure ~2cm in diameter. He has no respiratory complaints, and therest of his skin examination is normal. Laboratory datashow a white blood cell count of 12,000 with a normal dif-ferential. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate is 64 mm/h. Achest radiograph is normal. Thyroid-stimulating hormoneis 3.27 mU/L, and a glycosylated hemoglobin is 5.3%.Which of the following conditions is he also likely to have?
A. Giant cell arteritis
B. Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia
C. SarcoidosisD. Type 1 diabetesE. Uveitis
VIII-13.    A 55-year-old male with cirrhosis is seen in the
clinic to follow up a recent hospitalization for spontane-ous bacterial peritonitis. He is doing well and ﬁnishinghis course of antibiotics. He is taking propranolol andlactulose; besides complications of end-stage liver disease,he has well-controlled diabetes mellitus and had a basalcell carcinoma resected 5 years ago. The cirrhosis isthought to be due to alcohol abuse, and his last drink ofalcohol was 2 weeks ago. He and his wife ask if he is a livertransplant candidate. He can be counseled in which of thefollowing ways?
A. He is not a transplant candidate as he has a history
of alcohol dependence.
B. He is not a transplant candidate now, but may be after
a sustained period of proven abstinence from alcohol.
C. Because he has diabetes mellitus he is not a trans-
plant candidate.D. Because he had a skin cancer he is not a transplant
candidate.
E. He is appropriate for liver transplantation and
should be referred immediately.
VIII-14.    A 16-year-old woman had visited your clinic 1
month ago with jaundice, vomiting, malaise, and anorexia.
Two other family members were ill with similar symptoms.Based on viral serologies, including a positive anti-hepatitisA virus (HA V) IgM, a diagnosis of hepatitis A was made.The patient was treated conservatively, and 1 week afterﬁrst presenting, she appeared to have made a full recovery.She returns to your clinic today complaining of the samesymptoms she had 1 month ago. She is jaundiced, and aninitial panel of laboratory tests returns elevated transami-nases. Which of the following offers the best explanation ofwhat has occurred in this patient?
A. Co-infection with hepatitis C
B. Hepatitis A recurrenceC. Inappropriate treatment of initial infectionD. Incorrect initial diagnosis; this patient likely has
hepatitis B
E. Relapsing hepatitis
VIII-15.    A male patient with inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD) comes to your ofﬁce as a new patient. Reviewing themedical records, you note that he has had primarily rectaldisease. Macroscopic photographs from his most recentcolonoscopy show a lumpy, bumpy, hemorrhagic mucosawith ulcerations. Histology shows a process that is limitedto the mucosa, with the deep layers unaffected. There arecrypt abscesses. Which historic feature would be surpris-ing in a patient with this form of IBD?
A. Age 15–30
B. Current smokerC. Fraternal twin sister does not have IBDD. Identical twin brother does not have IBDE. Intact appendix
VIII-16.    A 26-year-old male presents with persistent peri-
anal pain for 2 months that is worse with defecation. Thepatient notes that he occasionally sees small amounts ofred blood on the toilet tissue. He never has had bloodstaining the toilet bowl. He reports persistent constipationbut has not had any incontinence. He denies anal trauma.On physical examination there is a linear ulceration withraised edges with a skin tag at the distal end. Circular ﬁ-bers of the hypertrophied internal sphincter are visible.What is the most appropriate treatment of this disease?
A. Sitz baths
B. Placement of a mechanical loop followed by surgical
resection
C. Steroid enemasD. Nitroglycerin ointmentE. Mesalamine enemasVIII-13. (Continued) VIII-10. (Continued)
310 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VIII-17.    A 76-year-old man complains of frequent small stools
that are not abnormally liquid or hard. There is some pain
with passing the stool. He has no abdominal pain, nausea,melena, vomiting, or fever. He has approximately eight toten bowel movements per day, which interferes with hisquality of life, though there is no fecal incontinence. What isa possible diagnosis to explain his complaints?
A. Hypothyroidism
B. Neuromuscular disorderC. ProctitisD. Ulcerative colitisE. Viral gastroenteritis
VIII-18.    Which of the following proteins does not cause se-
cretion of gastric acid?
A. Acetylcholine
B. CaffeineC. GastrinD. HistamineE. Somatostatin
VIII-19.    A 62-year-old female has a 3-month history of dif-
fuse crampy abdominal pain and watery diarrhea and haslost 14 lb over this period. There is no prior history of ab-dominal or gynecologic disease. She is on no regular medi-cations, is a nonsmoker, and does not consume alcohol.Colonoscopy reveals normal colonic mucosa. Biopsies of thecolon reveal inﬂammation with extensive subepithelial col-lagen deposition and lymphocytic inﬁltration of the epithe-lium. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Collagenous colitis
B. Crohn’s diseaseC. Ischemic colitisD. Lymphocytic colitisE. Ulcerative colitis
VIII-20.    A 29-year-old woman who recently immigrated
to the United States from South America presents to alocal emergency room with severe abdominal pain,jaundice, and fever. No one else at home is ill. She is un-sure how long her symptoms have been going on, butdescribes a sudden worsening over the past 3 days. Shehas been unable to get out of bed and has not been eat-ing well over that period of time. She has had nauseaand vomiting. She denies alcohol or illicit drug use. Sheis rapidly triaged and on initial laboratory studies isfound to have an ALT and AST in the thousands. She isto be admitted for inpatient management, and viralhepatitis serologies are sent. In a patient with acute hep-atitis B, which of the following would be the ﬁrst indica-tion of infection?
A. Anti-HBc (antibody to hepatitis B core antigen)
B. Clinical symptoms such as fever, jaundice, and ab-
dominal pain
C. HBeAg (hepatitis B e antigen)D. HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen)E. Increased transaminases
VIII-21.   The patient described above has the following lab-
oratory results: HBsAg is positive, Anti-HBc IgM is posi-tive, and HBeAg is positive. All other serologies arenegative. She is diagnosed with acute hepatitis B. Wheninterpreting hepatitis B serology results, the term “windowperiod” refers to the time between which of the following?
A. Anti-HBs and anti-HBc positivity
B. Clinical symptoms and anti-HBsC. HBsAg and anti-HBs positivityD. HBsAg and HBeAg positivityE. Increased transaminases and HBsAg
VIII-22.   A 57-year-old man with peptic ulcer disease experi-
ences transient improvement with Helicobacter pylori  eradi-
cation. However, 3 months later, symptoms recur despiteacid-suppressing therapy. He does not take nonsteroidalanti-inﬂammatory agents. Stool analysis for H. pylori  anti-
gen is negative. Upper GI endoscopy reveals prominent gas-tric folds together with the persistent ulceration in theduodenal bulb previously detected and the beginning of anew ulceration 4 cm proximal to the initial ulcer. Fastinggastrin levels are elevated and basal acid secretion is 15 meq/h.What is the best test to perform to make the diagnosis?
A. No additional testing is necessary.
B. Blood sampling for gastrin levels following a meal.C. Blood sampling for gastrin levels following secretin
administration.
D. Endoscopic ultrasonography of the pancreas.E. Genetic testing for mutations in the MEN1 gene.
VIII-23.   A 29-year-old woman comes to see you in clinic be-
cause of abdominal discomfort. She feels abdominal discom-fort on most days of the week, and the pain varies in locationand intensity. She notes constipation as well as diarrhea, butdiarrhea predominates. In comparison to 6 months ago, shehas more bloating and ﬂatulence than she has had before.She identiﬁes eating and stress as aggravating factors, and herpain is relieved by defecation. Y ou suspect irritable bowelsyndrome (IBS). Laboratory data include: white blood cell(WBC) count 8000/ µL, hematocrit, 32%, platelets, 210,000/
µL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 44 mm/h.
Stool studies show the presence of lactoferrin but no blood.Which intervention is appropriate at this time?
A. Antidepressants
B. CiproﬂoxacinC. ColonoscopyD. Reassurance and patient counselingE. Stool bulking agents
VIII-24.   After a careful history and physical and a cost-effective
workup, you have diagnosed your patient with IBS. Whatother condition would you expect to ﬁnd in this patient?VIII-20. (Continued)
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 311
A. Abnormal brain anatomy
B. Autoimmune diseaseC. History of sexually transmitted diseasesD. Hypersensitivity to peripheral stimuliE. Psychiatric diagnosis
VIII-25.    Which of the following statements about cardiac
cirrhosis is true?
A. Prolonged passive congestion from right-sided heart
failure results ﬁrst in congestion and necrosis of
portal triads, resulting in subsequent ﬁbrosis.
B. AST and ALT levels may mimic the very high levels
seen in acute hepatitis infection or acetaminophentoxicity.
C. Budd-Chiari syndrome cannot be distinguished
clinically from cardiac cirrhosis.
D. Venoocclusive disease is a major cause of morbidity
and mortality in patients undergoing liver trans-plantation.
E. Echocardiography is the gold standard for diagnos-
ing constrictive pericarditis as a cause of cirrhosis.
VIII-26.    A patient with known peptic ulcer disease presents
with sudden abdominal pain to the emergency depart-ment. She is thought to have peritonitis but refuses an ab-dominal examination due to the discomfort caused byprevious examinations. Which of the following maneu-vers will provide reasonably speciﬁc evidence of peritoni-tis without manual palpation of the abdomen?
A. Bowel sounds are absent on auscultation.
B. Forced cough elicits abdominal pain.C. Hyperactive bowel sounds are heard on auscultation.D. Pain is elicited with gentle pressure at the costover-
tebral angle.
E. Rectal examination reveals heme-positive stools.
VIII-27.    In chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, pres-
ence of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) signiﬁes which ofthe following?
A. Development of liver ﬁbrosis leading to cirrhosis
B. Dominant viral population is less virulent and less
transmissible
C. Increased likelihood of an acute ﬂare in the next 1–2
weeks
D. Ongoing viral replicationE. Resolving infection
VIII-28.    A 42-year-old male presents for evaluation of re-
current sharp substernal chest pain that occurs primarilyat rest and radiates to both arms and the sides of thechest. He notes that the pain is worse with eating andemotional stress. The pain lasts approximately 10 min be-fore resolving entirely. He has undergone a full cardiacevaluation, including negative exercise echocardiographyfor inducible ischemia. Y ou suspect diffuse esophagealspasm and order a barium swallow for further evaluation.Which of the following ﬁndings would best correlate withyour suspected diagnosis?
A. Proximal esophageal dilatation with tapered beak-
like appearance distally near the gastroesophageal
junction
B. Uncoordinated distal esophageal contractions re-
sulting in a corkscrew appearance of the esophagus
C. Dilation of the esophagus with loss of peristaltic
contractions in the middle and distal portions of theesophagus
D. Reﬂux of barium back into the distal portion of the
esophagus
E. A tapered narrowing in the distal esophagus with an
apple core–like lesion
VIII-29.    A 26-year-old woman presents to your clinic and
is interested in getting pregnant. She seeks your advice re-garding vaccines she should obtain, and in particular asksabout the hepatitis B vaccine. She works as a receptionistfor a local business, denies alcohol or illicit drug use, andis in a monogamous relationship. Which of the followingis true regarding hepatitis B vaccination?
A. Hepatitis B vaccine consists of two intramuscular
doses 1 month apart.
B. Only patients with deﬁned risk factors need be vac-
cinated.
C. Pregnancy is not a contraindication to the hepatitis
B vaccine.
D. This patient’s hepatitis serologies should be checked
prior to vaccination.
E. Vaccination should not be administered to children
under 2 years old.
VIII-30.    A 41-year-old female presents to your clinic with a
week of jaundice. She notes pruritus, icterus, and dark
urine. She denies fever, abdominal pain, or weight loss.The examination is unremarkable except for yellow dis-coloration of the skin. T otal bilirubin is 6.0 mg/dL, anddirect bilirubin is 5.1 mg/dL. AST is 84 U/L, and ALT is 92U/L. Alkaline phosphatase is 662 U/L. CT scan of the ab-domen is unremarkable. Right upper quadrant ultra-sound shows a normal gallbladder but does not visualizethe common bile duct. What is the most appropriate nextmanagement step?
A. Antibiotics and observation
B. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP)
C. Hepatitis serologiesD. HIDA scanE. Serologies for antimitochondrial antibodies
VIII-31.    A 46-year-old woman with a past medical history
of osteoporosis presents to the hospital because of he-matemesis. She reports having bright-red bloody emesisVIII-28. (Continued) VIII-24. (Continued)
312 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
for 2 h as well as seeing “coffee-grounds” in her emesis.
However, you do not witness any vomiting in the emer-gency department. She takes calcium, vitamin D, andalendronate. Blood pressure is 108/60 mmHg, heart rate93 beats/min, and temperature 37.6°C. Her hematocrit is30% (baseline 37%). Y ou request an emergent upper en-doscopy and resuscitate the patient with ﬂuids. What isthe role for immediate IV proton-pump inhibitor (PPI)therapy in this patient?
A. It is contraindicated given her history of osteoporosis.
B. It should be initiated as this will decrease further
bleeding.
C. It should be initiated only if high-risk ulcers are
identiﬁed at the time of endoscopy.
D. It will decrease her bleeding risk, length of hospitaliza-
tion, likelihood to need surgery, and overall mortality.
E. There is no indication for immediate IV PPI therapy.
VIII-32.    While waiting for endoscopy, you recheck her he-
matocrit 2 h later and it remains 30%. Vital signs are un-changed. Y ou perform a gastric lavage, which returnsclear ﬂuid. T est of occult blood in the lavage is negative.What is the most appropriate intervention at this time?
A. Perform a CT scan of the abdomen.
B. Continue current management and plan.C. Perform another gastric lavage.D. Recheck another hematocrit in 2 h.E. Request psychiatric consultation for factitious bleed-
ing.
VIII-33.    A 34-year-old male reports “yellow eyes” for the
last 2 days during a routine employment examination. Hestates that since his early twenties he has had similar epi-sodes of yellow eyes lasting 2 to 4 days. He denies nausea,abdominal pain, dark urine, light-colored stools, pruri-tus, or weight loss. He has not sought prior medical at-tention because of ﬁnances, lack of symptoms, and thepredictable resolution of the yellow eyes. He takes a mul-tivitamin and some herbal medications. On examinationhe is mildly obese. He is icteric. There are no stigmata ofchronic liver disease. The patient’s abdomen is soft andnontender, and there is no organomegaly. Laboratory ex-aminations are normal except for a total bilirubin of 3mg/dL. Direct bilirubin is 0.2 mg/dL. AST, ALT, and alka-line phosphatase are normal. Hematocrit, lactate dehy-drogenase (LDH), and haptoglobin are normal. Which ofthe following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1
B. CholelithiasisC. Dubin-Johnson syndromeD. Gilbert’s syndromeE. Medication-induced hemolysis
VIII-34.    What is the appropriate next management step for
this patient?A. Genotype studiesB. Peripheral blood smearC. PrednisoneD. ReassuranceE. Right upper quadrant ultrasound
VIII-35.   A 45-year-old male says that for the last year he
occasionally has regurgitated particles from food eatenseveral days earlier. His wife complains that his breath hasbeen foul-smelling. He has had occasional dysphagia forsolid foods. The most likely diagnosis is
A. gastric outlet obstruction
B. sclerodermaC. achalasiaD. Zenker’s diverticulumE. diabetic gastroparesis
VIII-36.   All the following cancers commonly metastasize to
the liver except
A. breast
B. colonC. lungD. melanomaE. prostate
VIII-37.   A 38-year-old male presents to his physician with
4 to 6 months of weight loss and joint complaints. He re-ports that his appetite is good, but he has had diarrheawith six to eight loose, foul-smelling stools each day. Hehas also had migratory pain in the knees and shoulders.Stool studies demonstrate steatorrhea. Which of the fol-lowing diagnostic tests is most likely to be positive in thispatient?
A. Serum IgA antiendomysial antibodies
B. Serum IgA antigliadin antibodiesC. Serum PCR for Tropheryma whippelii
D. Small bowel biopsy showing reduced villous height
and crypt hyperplasia
E. Stool Clostridium difﬁcile  toxin
VIII-38.   Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) may be caused
by exogenous factors. Gastrointestinal ﬂora may promotean inﬂammatory response or may inhibit inﬂammation.Probiotics have been used to treat IBD. Which of the fol-lowing organisms has been used in the treatment of IBD?
A. Campylobacter  spp.
B. Clostridium difﬁcile
C. Escherichia  spp.
D. Lactobacillus  spp.
E. Shigella  spp.
VIII-39.    A 61-year-old male is admitted to your service for
swelling of the abdomen. Y ou detect ascites on clinical
examination and perform a paracentesis. The results
show a white blood cell count of 300 leukocytes/ µL withVIII-34. (Continued) VIII-31. (Continued)
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 313
35% polymorphonuclear cells. The peritoneal albumin
level is 1.2 g/dL, protein is 2.0 g/dL, and triglycerides are320 mg/dL. Peritoneal cultures are pending. Serum albu-min is 2.6 g/dL. Which of the following is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Congestive heart failure
B. Peritoneal tuberculosisC. Peritoneal carcinomatosisD. Chylous ascitesE. Bacterial peritonitis
VIII-40.    A 78-year-old female nursing home resident com-
plains of rectal pain and profuse watery diarrhea for 2days. Her nurse reports 2 weeks of constipation prior tothis. A physician sent a Clostridium difﬁcile  stool antigen
test that returned negative. What is the next step in estab-lishing a diagnosis?
A. Colonoscopy
B. Digital rectal examinationC. Repeat C. difﬁcile  stool antigen test
D. Rotavirus stool antigenE. Stool culture
VIII-41.    Which of the following is the most common cause
of acute pancreatitis in the United States?
A. Alcohol
B. DrugsC. GallstonesD. HypercalcemiaE. Hyperlipidemia
VIII-42.    A 24-year-old woman with a history of irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS) has been treated with loperamide,psyllium, and imipramine. Because of continued abdom-inal pain, bloating, and alternating constipation/diarrhea,she is started on alosetron, 0.5 mg bid. Five days later sheis brought to the emergency department with severe ab-dominal pain. On examination she is in severe discom-fort. Her temperature is 39°C, blood pressure 90/55mmHg, heart rate 115 beats/min, respiratory rate 22breaths/min, and oxygen saturation normal. Abdominalexamination is notable for hypoactive bowel sounds, dif-fuse tenderness, and guarding without rebound tender-ness. Her stool is heme positive. Laboratory studies arenotable for a white blood cell count of 15,800 with a leftshift and a slight anion gap metabolic acidosis. Which ofthe following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Appendicitis
B. Clostridium difﬁcile  colitis
C. Crohn’s diseaseD. Ischemic colitisE. Perforated duodenal ulcer
VIII-43.    An 88-year-old woman is brought to your clinic
by her family because she has become increasingly so-cially withdrawn. The patient lives alone and has beenreluctant to visit or be visited by her family. Familymembers, including seven children, also note a foulodor in her apartment and on her person. She has nothad any weight loss. Alone in the examining room, sheonly complains of hemorrhoids. On mental status ex-amination, she does have signs of depression. Which ofthe following interventions is most appropriate at thistime?
A. Head CT scan
B. Initiate treatment with an antidepressant medicationC. Physical examination including genitourinary and
rectal examination
D. Screening for occult malignancyE. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone
VIII-44.    Y ou are asked to consult on a 62-year-old
white female with pruritus for 4 months. She hasnoted progressive fatigue and a 5-lb weight loss. Shehas intermittent nausea but no vomiting and denieschanges in her bowel habits. There is no history ofprior alcohol use, blood transfusions, or illicit druguse. The patient is widowed and had two heterosexualpartners in her lifetime. Her past medical history issigniﬁcant only for hypothyroidism, for which shetakes levothyroxine. Her family history is unremark-able. On examination she is mildly icteric. She hasspider angiomata on her torso. Y ou palpate a nodularliver edge 2 cm below the right costal margin. The re-mainder of the examination is unremarkable. A rightupper quadrant ultrasound conﬁrms your suspicionof cirrhosis. Y ou order a complete blood count and acomprehensive metabolic panel. What is the most ap-propriate next test?
A. 24-h urine copper
B. Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA)C. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP)
D. Hepatitis B serologiesE. Serum ferritin
VIII-45.    Y our 33-year-old patient with Crohn’s disease
(CD) has had a disappointing disease response to gluco-corticoids and 5-ASA agents. He is interested in steroid-sparing agents. He has no liver or renal disease. Y ou pre-scribe once-weekly methotrexate injections. In additionto monitoring hepatic function and complete bloodcount, what other complication of methotrexate therapydo you advise the patient of?
A. Disseminated histoplasmosis
B. LymphomaC. PancreatitisD. PneumonitisE. Primary sclerosing cholangitisVIII-43. (Continued) VIII-39. (Continued)
314 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VIII-46 .   Which of the following is potentially associated
with constipation?
A. Colon cancer
B. DepressionC. Eating disorderD. HypothyroidismE. Irritable bowel syndromeF. Pharmaceutical agentsG. All of the above
VIII-47.    A 23-year-old Turkish female presents to the
emergency department for evaluation of acute abdominalpain. She reports that she has had multiple episodes of se-vere abdominal pain since age 15. These episodes havebeen very severe, once prompting exploratory laparot-omy at age 18 with removal of the appendix, which washistologically benign. She reports that the pain lasts ap-proximately 2 or 3 days and then resolves entirely withoutintervention. There are no clear triggers for the pain. Pastevaluation has included normal upper and lower endos-copy, normal small bowel series, and multiple CT scansthat have shown only small amounts of free ﬂuid in theabdominal cavity. In addition, the patient recently devel-oped a migratory arthritis affecting her knees and ankles.The patient is currently on no medications. Multipleother family members have similar complaints. On physi-cal examination the patient appears in moderate distress,lying very still. T emperature is 39.8°C (103.6°F). Heartrate is 130, and blood pressure is 112/66. She has evidenceof a pleural effusion on the right with decreased breathsounds and dullness to percussion of half the lung ﬁeld.She has a regular tachycardia without murmurs. Bowelsounds are hypoactive, and there is moderate diffuse ab-dominal tenderness. There is mild rebound tendernessdiffusely throughout the abdomen without guarding. Herleft knee is swollen and erythematous with an effusion.Laboratory studies show a white blood cell count of15,300/mm
3 (90% neutrophils). Erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate is 110 s. Arthrocentesis reveals a white blood cellcount of 68,000 with 98% neutrophils. Culture is negativeat 1 week. The patient’s symptoms resolve over the courseof 72 h. What is the best therapy for prevention of the pa-tient’s symptoms?
A. Azathioprine
B. ColchicineC. HeminD. IndomethacinE. Prednisone
VIII-48.    An 18-year-old man presents to a rural clinic with
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, abdominal discomfort, myal-gias, and jaundice. He describes occasional alcohol useand is sexually active. He describes using heroin and co-caine “a few times in the past.” He works as a short-ordercook in a local restaurant. He has lost 15.5 kg (34 lb) sincehis last visit to clinic and appears emaciated and ill-appearing. On examination he is noted to have ictericsclerae and a palpable, tender liver below the right costalmargin. In regard to acute hepatitis, which of the follow-ing is true?
A. A distinction between viral etiologies cannot be
made using clinical criteria alone.
B. Based on age and risk factors, he is likely to have
hepatitis B infection.
C. He does not have hepatitis E virus, as this infects
only pregnant women.
D. This patient cannot have hepatitis C because his
presentation is too acute.
E. This patient does not have hepatitis A because his
presentation is too fulminant.
VIII-49.   A 22-year-old pregnant woman presents to the
emergency department with abdominal pain and malaise.
Her symptoms began about 8 h prior to presentation andshe has no diarrhea. Her pain is mostly in the right ﬂankcurrently but began in the periumbilical area. She hasnausea and vomiting. She has had an uncomplicatedpregnancy and she is at 24 weeks’ gestation. She receivesregular obstetric care, and her last examination, includingan echo, was normal 1 week ago. T emperature is 100.3°C,blood pressure 129/90 mmHg, and heart rate 105 beats/min. Physical examination shows only mild abdominaltenderness. The abdomen is soft and bowel sounds are di-minished. She is tender in the right lower quadrant with-out costovertebral angle tenderness. The genitourinaryexamination is normal, and she has a closed os. Fetalmonitoring shows a normal fetal heart rate. White bloodcell count is 10,000/ µL. Urine analysis shows 2 white
blood cells per high powered ﬁeld, no epithelial cells, and1 red blood cell per high powered ﬁeld. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Acute appendicitis
B. Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndromeC. MittelschmerzD. NephrolithiasisE. Pyelonephritis
VIII-50.   A 54-year-old male presents with 1 month of diar-
rhea. He states that he has 8 to 10 loose bowel movementsa day. He has lost 8 lb during this time. Vital signs andphysical examination are normal. Serum laboratory stud-ies are normal. A 24-h stool collection reveals 500 g ofstool with a measured stool osmolality of 200 mosmol/Land a calculated stool osmolality of 210 mosmol/L. Basedon these ﬁndings, what is the most likely cause of this pa-tient’s diarrhea?
A. Celiac sprue
B. Chronic pancreatitisC. Lactase deﬁciencyD. Vasoactive intestinal peptide tumorE. Whipple’s diseaseVIII-48. (Continued)
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 315
VIII-51.    All the following are risk factors for developing
cholangiocarcinoma except
A. choledochal cyst
B. cholelithiasisC. liver ﬂukesD. sclerosing cholangitisE. working in the rubber industry
VIII-52.    A 34-year-old female presents to your clinic with 5
weeks of right upper quadrant pain. She denies nausea,changes in bowel habits, or weight loss. Her past medicalhistory is unremarkable. Her only medications are a mul-tivitamin and oral contraceptives. The examination is no-table for a palpable liver mass 2 cm below the right costalmargin. Serum α fetoprotein is normal. An abdominal
CT scan shows two 3-cm hypervascular lesions in theright hepatic lobe that are suggestive of hepatocellular ad-enoma. What is the most appropriate next managementstep?
A. Observation
B. Discontinuation of oral contraceptivesC. Referral for surgical excisionD. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA)E. CT-guided biopsy
VIII-53.    A 50-year-old male without a signiﬁcant past
medical history or recent exposure to alcohol presentswith midepigastric abdominal pain, nausea, and vomit-ing. The physical examination is remarkable for the ab-sence of jaundice and any other speciﬁc physical ﬁndings.Which of the following is the best strategy for screeningfor acute pancreatitis?
A. Measurement of serum amylase
B. Measurement of serum lipaseC. Measurement of both serum amylase and serum lipaseD. Isoamylase level analysisE. Magnetic resonance imaging
VIII-54.    A 43-year-old man with alcohol dependence pre-
sents with a sharp epigastric pain radiating to the back.He also has had nausea with bilious emesis on three occa-sions in the past 24 h. He has had no bright red blood orcoffee-ground material in his vomitus, nor has he hadmelena. His last alcohol intake was yesterday, and he nor-mally drinks a gallon of whiskey on a daily basis. He has ahistory of acute pancreatitis due to alcohol. On physicalexamination, he appears uncomfortable, writhing in bed.His vital signs are: heart rate 112 beats/min, blood pres-sure 156/92 mmHg, temperature 37.8°C, respiratory rate24 breaths/min, and Sa
O2 96% on room air. The abdomi-
nal examination reveals decreased bowel sounds and istympanitic to percussion. There is diffuse tenderness topalpation in the midepigastrium without rebound. Vol-untary guarding is present. The liver span is 15 cm to per-cussion, and a smooth liver edge is palpated 5 cm belowthe right costal margin. No spleen tip is palpable. Theamylase is 580 U/L, and lipase is 690 U/L. Liver functiontesting reveals an AST of 280 U/L, ALT 184 U/L, alkalinephosphatase 89 U/L, and albumin 2.6 g/dL. Fecal occultblood testing is negative. Which of the following best re-ﬂects the current recommendations on treatment of acutepancreatitis in this patient?
A. A nasogastric tube with intermittent suctioning is
necessary to prevent ongoing stimulation of pancre-
atic enzyme release by gastric secretions.
B. Early oral alimentation decreases the risk of infec-
tion and speeds recovery
C. Placement of a nasojejunal feeding tube will allow
early institution of oral feeding and reduce hospitallength of stay.
D. T otal parenteral nutrition is indicated because the
patient has evidence of chronic malnutrition and isexpected to be unable to tolerate oral alimentationfor >1 week.
E. Treatment with analgesia, IV ﬂuid resuscitation, and
avoidance of oral feeding will result in improvementin 3–7 days.
VIII-55.    A 38-year-old male is seen in the urgent care cen-
ter with several hours of severe abdominal pain. Hissymptoms began suddenly, but he reports several monthsof pain in the epigastrium after eating, with a resultant10-lb weight loss. He takes no medications besides over-the-counter antacids and has no other medical problemsor habits. On physical examination temperature is 38.0°C(100.4°F), pulse 130/min, respiratory rate 24/min, andblood pressure 110/50 mmHg. His abdomen has absentbowel sounds and is rigid with involuntary guarding dif-fusely. A plain ﬁlm of the abdomen is obtained and showsfree air under the diaphragm. Which of the following ismost likely to be found in the operating room?
A. Necrotic bowel
B. Necrotic pancreasC. Perforated duodenal ulcerD. Perforated gallbladderE. Perforated gastric ulcer
VIII-56.    Which of the following is the source of this pa-
tient’s peritonitis?
A. Blood
B. BileC. Foreign bodyD. Gastric contentsE. Pancreatic enzymes
VIII-57.    A 37-year-old female presents with a chief com-
plaint of difﬁculty swallowing. She reports that she feelsas if food gets stuck in her midchest. She notices no dif-ference between liquids or solids but does note that thesymptoms worsen when she eats hurriedly. She has had a15-lb weight loss and reports regurgitation of undigestedVIII-54. (Continued)
316 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
food after eating. The patient undergoes barium swallow.
What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Esophageal stricture
B. Esophageal spasmC. AchalasiaD. Esophageal cancerE. CREST syndrome
VIII-58.    Which of the following extraintestinal manifesta-
tions of inﬂammatory bowel disease typically worsenswith exacerbations of disease activity?
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. ArthritisC. NephrolithiasisD. Primary sclerosing cholangitisE. Uveitis
VIII-59.    A 62-year-old male is evaluated in the emergency
department for a complaint of vomiting and inability totolerate oral intake. These symptoms have gradually pro-gressed from occasional episodes of emesis after meals toan extent where the patient has not been able to toleratesolid foods for the last week. He notes no signiﬁcant sen-sation of nausea before the emesis. Instead, the patientdescribes vomiting partially digested foods within a halfhour of eating. The patient notes no abdominal pain. Hehas experienced an unintentional 30-lb weight loss over 6months. The patient has a history of diabetes mellitusthat is poorly controlled, with a glycosylated hemoglobinlevel of 8.9%. The patient underwent partial gastrectomyfor peptic ulcer disease at age 52. His only medication isinsulin therapy. On physical examination the patient iscachectic with a body mass index (BMI) of 17. He hastemporal wasting. The abdominal examination reveals nomasses and is nontender. The bowel sounds are normoac-tive, and the patient’s stool is hemoccult-negative. An ab-dominal ﬁlm shows an enlarged gastric bubble withdecompressed small intestinal loops. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Small bowel obstruction
B. GastroparesisC. Esophageal strictureD. Gastric outlet obstructionE. Cholelithiasis
VIII-60.    The patient in Question VIII-59 undergoes upper
endoscopy for further evaluation, and a large mass is seenin the fundus of the stomach. Biopsy shows gastric ade-nocarcinoma. All the following are risk factors for the de-velopment of this disease except
A. atrophic gastritisB. alcoholismC. Helicobacter pylori  infection
D. high consumption of salted and smoked foodE. juvenile hamartomatous polyps
VIII-61.    A 25-year-old female with cystic ﬁbrosis is diag-
nosed with chronic pancreatitis. She is at risk for all of thefollowing complications except
A. vitamin B
12 deﬁciency
B. vitamin A deﬁciency
C. pancreatic carcinomaD. niacin deﬁciencyE. steatorrhea
VIII-62.    All of the following statements regarding fat mal-
absorption are true except
A. 90% of pancreatic exocrine function must be lost
before malabsorption ensues.
B. Celiac disease is a commonly overlooked cause of
nonspeciﬁc, gastrointestinal symptoms and fat mal-absorption.
C. Nutritional deﬁciencies are uncommon.D. Steatorrhea is formally established with >7 g of fat
in stool over 24 h.
E. Symptoms include greasy, foul-smelling stools that
are difﬁcult to ﬂush.
VIII-63.    A 64-year-old man seeks evaluation from his pri-
mary care physician because of chronic diarrhea. He re-ports that he has two or three large loose bowelmovements daily. He describes them as markedly foul-smelling, and they often leave an oily ring in the toilet.He also notes that the bowel movements often followheavy meals, but if he fasts or eats low-fat foods, thestools are more formed. Over the past 6 months, he haslost about 18 kg (40 lb). In this setting, he reports inter-mittent episodes of abdominal pain that can be quite se-FIGURE VIII-57
VIII-59. (Continued) VIII-57. (Continued)
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 317
vere. He describes the pain as sharp and in a mid-
epigastric location. He has not sought evaluation of thepain previously, but when it occurs, he will limit his oralintake and treat the pain with nonsteroidal antiinﬂam-matory drugs. He notes the pain has not lasted for >48 hand is not associated with meals. His past medical his-tory is remarkable for peripheral vascular disease and to-bacco use. He currently smokes one pack of cigarettesdaily. In addition, he drinks two to six beers daily. He hasstopped all alcohol intake for up to a week at a time inthe past without withdrawal symptoms. His currentmedications are aspirin, 81 mg daily, and albuterol me-tered dose inhaler (MDI) on an as-needed basis. Onphysical examination, the patient is thin but appearswell. His body mass index is 18.2 kg/m
2. Vital signs are
normal. Cardiac and pulmonary examinations are nor-mal. The abdominal examination shows mild epigastrictenderness without rebound or guarding. The liver spanis 12 cm to percussion and palpable 2 cm below the rightcostal margin. There is no splenomegaly or ascitespresent. There are decreased pulses in the lower extremi-ties bilaterally. An abdominal radiograph demonstratescalciﬁcations in the epigastric area, and CT scan con-ﬁrms that these calciﬁcations are located within the bodyof the pancreas. No pancreatic ductal dilatation is noted.An amylase level is 32 U/L, and lipase level is 22 U/L.What is the next most appropriate step in diagnosingand managing this patient’s primary complaint?
A. Advise the patient to stop all alcohol use and pre-
scribe pancreatic enzymes.
B. Advise the patient to stop all alcohol use and pre-
scribe narcotic analgesia and pancreatic enzymes.
C. Perform angiography to assess for ischemic bowel
disease.
D. Prescribe prokinetic agents to improve gastric emp-
tying.
E. Refer the patient for endoscopic retrograde cholang-
iopancreatography (ERCP) for sphincterotomy
VIII-64.    A 52-year-old male with chronic hepatitis C pre-
sents to your clinic with worsening right upper quadrant
pain. Examination shows a palpable right upper quadrantmass. CT scan shows a large 5 × 5 cm mass in the right
lobe of the liver. Serum α fetoprotein is elevated. A CT-
guided liver biopsy conﬁrms the suspected diagnosis ofhepatocellular carcinoma. All the following are appropri-ate management steps except
A. referral for surgical resectionB. referral for radiofrequency ablationC. referral for liver transplantationD. systemic chemotherapyE. chemoembolization
VIII-65.    What is the most common cause of chronic secre-
tory diarrhea in the United States?A. Carcinoid tumor
B. Crohn’s disease with ileitisC. Lactose intoleranceD. Lymphocytic colitisE. Medications
VIII-66.    A 26-year-old female presents to the emergency
room after ingesting “lots of pills.” Her boyfriend discov-
ered her crying on the ﬂoor of their bedroom, foundnumerous open bottles of acetaminophen scatteredthroughout the apartment, and called 911. He does notknow when she ﬁrst took the pills but had last seen her 4h before ﬁnding her on the ﬂoor. She is nauseated andvomits once in the emergency room. Vital signs are stable.On examination she is alert and oriented. She has someepigastric tenderness to deep palpation. Otherwise theexamination is unremarkable. Her acetaminophen level is400µg/mL. Liver function tests are normal. Which of the
following statements regarding her clinical condition isnot true?
A. N-acetylcysteine is the treatment of choice for aceta-minophen toxicity.
B. Alkalinization of the urine is not effective as a treat-
ment for acetaminophen toxicity.
C. The patient should be admitted and observed for 48
to 72 h as her hepatic injury may manifest days afterthe initial ingestion.
D. Liver transplantation is the only option for patients
who develop fulminant hepatic failure from aceta-minophen.
E. Normal liver function tests at presentation make
signiﬁcant liver injury unlikely.
VIII-67.    A 37-year-old woman presents with abdominal
pain, anorexia, and fever of 4 days’ duration. The ab-dominal pain is mostly in the left lower quadrant. Herpast medical history is signiﬁcant for irritable bowelsyndrome, diverticulitis treated 6 months ago, andstatus post-appendectomy. Since her last bout of di-verticulitis she has increased her ﬁber intake andavoids nuts and popcorn. Review of systems is positivefor weight loss, daily chills and sweats, and “bubbles”in her urinary stream. Her temperature is 39.6°C. Alimited CT scan shows thickened colonic wall (5 mm)and inﬂammation with pericolic fat stranding. She isadmitted with a presumptive diagnosis of diverticuli-tis. What is the most appropriate management for thispatient?
A. A trial of rifaximin and a high-ﬁber diet 
B. Bowel rest, ciproﬂoxacin, metronidazole, and ampi-
cillin
C. Examination of the urine sedimentD. Measurement of 24-h urine proteinE. Surgical removal of the affected colon and explorationVIII-65. (Continued) VIII-63. (Continued)
318 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
VIII-68.    A 69-year-old patient presents to the emergency
department with hematochezia of 4 h duration. The pa-
tient is pale but alert and oriented. Blood pressure is 107/82 mmHg, respiratory rate is 24 breaths/min and heartrate is 96 beats/min. The hematocrit is 24%, with a base-line of 32%. Which of the following represents the best ap-proach for localization of this patient’s intestinal bleeding?
A. Angiography is most appropriate for this massive
gastrointestinal (GI) bleed.
B. Angiography is of little utility since the patient is not
stable.
C. Colonoscopy is better suited to localize bleeding, if
it is massive.
D. Colonoscopy can be diagnostic and therapeutic in
this mild GI bleed.
E. Immediate surgery with intraoperative localization
is appropriate.
VIII-69.    Chronic active hepatitis is most reliably distin-
guished from chronic persistent hepatitis by the presence ofA. extrahepatic manifestations
B. hepatitis B surface antigen in the serumC. antibody to hepatitis B core antigen in the serumD. a signiﬁcant titer of anti-smooth-muscle antibodyE. characteristic liver histology
VIII-70.    All the following are causes of bloody diarrhea except
A. Campylobacter
B. Cryptosporidia
C. Escherichia coli
D. Entamoeba
E. Shigella
VIII-71.    A 36-year-old female with AIDS and a CD4 count
of 35/mm
3 presents with odynophagia and progressive
dysphagia. The patient reports daily fevers and a 20-lbweight loss. The patient has been treated with clotrima-zole troches without relief. On physical examination thepatient is cachectic with a body mass index (BMI) of 16and a weight of 86 lb. The patient has a temperature of38.2°C (100.8°F). She is noted to be orthostatic by bloodpressure and pulse. Examination of the oropharynx re-veals no evidence of thrush. The patient undergoes EGD,which reveals serpiginous ulcers in the distal esophaguswithout vesicles. No yellow plaques are noted. Multiplebiopsies are taken that show intranuclear and intracyto-plasmic inclusions in large endothelial cells and ﬁbro-blasts. What is the best treatment for this patient’sesophagitis?
A. Ganciclovir
B. ThalidomideC. GlucocorticoidsD. FluconazoleE. FoscarnetVIII-72.    A 32-year-old man who recently returned from a
vacation in Thailand presents with the acute onset ofjaundice, abdominal pain, and vomiting. He is able to tol-erate small amounts of food. His vital signs are normal,and an abdominal examination reveals a nontender liveredge palpable 2 cm below the right costal margin. Histransaminases are elevated in the thousands, hepatitis Bsurface (anti-HBs) antigen is positive, and antibody tohepatitis B surface antigen is negative. He has no previousmedical history and abstains from alcohol use. He hasnever received a hepatitis B vaccine series. Which of thefollowing do you recommend as ﬁrst-line management?
A. Conservative management and close follow-up
B. Hepatitis B vaccine seriesC. Hospital admission and initiation of a liver trans-
plant workup
D. Immediate entecavir treatment until anti-HBs is
positive
E. Immediate lamivudine treatment for a planned 6-
month course
VIII-73.    A 48-year-old male seeks evaluation for diarrhea
and malabsorptive symptoms. Approximately 5 years agothe patient underwent partial gastrectomy with gastroje-junostomy for a perforated duodenal ulcer. He had donewell since that time until 5 months ago, when he devel-oped abdominal pain and bloating after eating. In addi-tion, the patient has had profound diarrhea that occursafter eating and is worse after he eats fatty foods. He notesthat the diarrhea is foul-smelling and often leaves a greasyﬁlm in the toilet. On physical examination the patient isthin with a body mass index of 19. The examination isunremarkable. His stool is hemoccult-negative. Labora-tory studies are remarkable except for an albumin of 3.1g/dL. He is noted to have a hemoglobin of 9.6 mg/dL anda mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 106. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Dumping syndrome
B. Bile reﬂux gastropathyC. Afferent loop syndromeD. Postvagotomy diarrheaE. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
VIII-74.    A 17-year-old Asian student complains of abdom-
inal bloating and diarrhea, particularly after eating icecream and other milk products. Her parents have similarsymptoms. The patient denies any weight loss or systemicsymptoms. The physical examination is normal. Treat-ment with which of the following medications is mostlikely to reduce her symptoms?
A. Cholestyramine
B. MetoclopramideC. OmeprazoleD. Viokase®E. None of the above
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS 319
VIII-75.    A 36-year-old male presents with fatigue and tea-col-
ored urine for 5 days. Physical examination reveals jaundice
and tender hepatomegaly but is otherwise unremarkable.Laboratories are remarkable for an aspartate aminotransfer-ase (AST) of 2400 U/L and an alanine aminotransferase(ALT) of 2640 U/L. Alkaline phosphatase is 210 U/L. T otalbilirubin is 8.6 mg/dL. Which of the following is least likely to
cause this clinical picture and these laboratory abnormalities?
A. Acute hepatitis A infection
B. Acute hepatitis B infectionC. Acute hepatitis C infectionD. Acetaminophen ingestionE. Budd-Chiari syndrome
VIII-76.    A 69-year-old man with Parkinson’s disease is ad-
mitted to the intensive care unit from a long-term care fa-cility for diarrhea, fever, and hypotension. He initiallydeveloped diarrhea 2 days ago, and this morning wasfound to have a blood pressure of 72/44 mmHg, heart rateof 130 beats/min, and temperature of 38.9°C. He began toreceive IV ﬂuids and was transferred to the emergency de-partment. Upon arrival, he is lethargic and minimally re-sponsive. He remains febrile and hypotensive with bloodpressure 78/44 mmHg and heart rate 122 beats/min after1 L of normal saline. His abdomen is tense and distended,with hypoactive bowel sounds. A plain radiograph of theabdomen shows “thumbprinting” or free air, but the co-lon is dilated to 8 cm. Stool is positive for occult blood.The patient undergoes colonoscopy, and the results areshown in Figure VIII-76 (Color Atlas). What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Diverticulitis
B. Ischemic colitisC. Pseudomembranous colitisD. Salmonella infectionE. Ulcerative colitis
VIII-77.    One week after removal of a biliary mass, a patient
still has an elevated total bilirubin. The patient is recover-ing well and imaging of the hepatobiliary system shows noremaining pathology. The conjugated bilirubin is decreas-ing but remains elevated out of proportion to the patient’srecovery. What is the best explanation for this ﬁnding?
A. Bilirubin bound to albumin
B. Gilbert’s syndromeC. Hibernating hepatocytesD. Incomplete resectionE. Occult hemolysis
VIII-78.    Which of the following statements regarding bi-
lirubin metabolism is true?
A. Bacterial β-glucuronidases unconjugate the conju-
gated bilirubin that reaches the distal ileum.
B. Bilirubin solubilizes in the serum after conversion
from biliverdin in the reticuloendothelial system.C. Conjugated bilirubin is passively transported into
the bile canalicular system.
D. Glutathione S-transferase B facilitates conjugated
bilirubin’s transport into the bile canalicular system.
E. Most bilirubin that reaches the terminal ileum is re-
absorbed as urobilinogen.
VIII-79.    A patient with alcoholic cirrhosis has increasing
ascites despite dietary sodium control and diuretics. A
paracentesis shows clear, turbid ﬂuid. There are 2300white blood cells (WBCs) and 150 red blood cells per mi-croliter. The WBC differential shows 75% lymphocytes.Fluid protein is 3.2 g/dL and the serum-ascites albumingradient (SAAG) is 1.0 g/dL. What is the most appropri-ate next study in this patient’s management?
A. Adenosine deaminase activity of the ascitic ﬂuid
B. CT scan of the liverC. Peritoneal biopsyD. None; consider transplant evaluation
VIII-80.    A 24-year-old patient is admitted to the intensive
care unit with obtundation and jaundice over 1–2 days.No further history is available. The following laboratoryﬁndings are obtained:
T otal bilirubin 7.2 mg/dL
Direct bilirubin 4.0 mg/dLAST: 1478 U/LALT: 1056 U/LAlkaline phosphatase: 132 U/LINR: 3.1Albumin: 3.6 g/dL
All of the following tests are indicated except
A. antinuclear antibody (ANA)
B. ceruloplasminC. endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP)
D. hepatitis B surface antigenE. toxicology screen
VIII-81.    A defect in which of the following bilirubin meta-
bolic processes will give rise to bilirubinuria?
A. Conjugation of bilirubin to glucuronic acid
B. Conversion of biliverdin to bilirubinC. Transport of conjugated bilirubin into bile canaliculiD. Transport of unconjugated bilirubin into hepatocytes
VIII-82.    An 85-year-old woman is brought to a local
emergency room by her family. She has been complain-ing of abdominal pain off and on for several days, butthis morning states that this is the worst pain of her life.She is able to describe a sharp, stabbing pain in her ab-domen. Her family reports that she has not been eatingand seems to have no appetite. She has a past medicalhistory of atrial ﬁbrillation and hypercholesterolemia.VIII-78. (Continued)
320 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — QUESTIONS
She has had two episodes of vomiting and in the ER ex-
periences diarrhea that is hemoccult positive. On ex-amination she is afebrile, with a heart rate of 105 beats/min and blood pressure of 111/69 mmHg. Her abdo-men is mildly distended and she has hypoactive bowelsounds. She does not exhibit rebound tenderness orguarding. She is admitted for further management.Several hours after admission she becomes unrespon-sive. Blood pressure is difﬁcult to obtain and at best ap-proximation is 60/40 mmHg. She has a rigid abdomen.Surgery is called and the patient is taken for emergentlaparotomy. She is found to have acute mesenteric is-chemia. Which of the following is true regarding thisdiagnosis?
A. Mortality for this condition is >50%.
B. Risk factors include low-ﬁber diet and obesity.C. The “gold standard” for diagnosis is CT scan of the
abdomen.
D. The lack of acute abdominal signs in this case is un-
usual for mesenteric ischemia.
E. The splanchnic circulation is poorly collateralized.
VIII-83.    The differential diagnosis of an isolated unconju-
gated (indirect) hyperbilirubinemia is limited. In a pa-tient with isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia,which of these historic ﬁndings would be unlikely?
A. Calcium bilirubinate gallstones
B. CryoglobulinemiaC. History of goutD. SpherocytosisE. Recurrent long-bone pain crises
VIII-84.    Which of the following statements regarding pan-
creatic cancer is true?
A. Five-year survival is ~5%.
B. Most cases present with locally conﬁned disease
amenable to a surgical cure.
C. Pancreatic adenocarcinomas occur most frequently
in the pancreatic tail.
D. The median age of diagnosis is 49 years.E. The most common tumor type is an islet cell tumor.
VIII-85.    In a patient with ascites, which of the following
physical examination ﬁndings suggests a superior venacava obstruction instead of intrinsic hepatic cirrhosis?
A. Bulging ﬂanks
B. Collateral venous ﬂow downward toward the umbilicusC. Everted umbilicusD. Pulsatile liverE. Venous hum at the umbilicusVIII-86.    Y ou are managing a patient with stage IV pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. The patient has been treated with gem-citabine for 16 weeks, and a recent CT scan conﬁrmsgrowth of the mass in the head of the pancreas over thattime period. The patient has had biliary stents placed with-out complication for obstructive jaundice. The patient’sweight is stable and he is able to perform activities of dailyliving independently. The patient wants to know what “thenext step” is now that gemcitabine has seemed to fail. Whatis the most appropriate recommendation at this time?
A. Initiate treatment with 5-ﬂuorouracil.
B. Make a referral to home hospice care.C. Refer for debulking surgery.D. Refer for external beam radiation as an adjunct to
chemotherapy.
E. Suggest enrolling in a clinical trial.
VIII-87.    All of the following physical examination clues are
helpful for differentiating jaundice caused by hyperbiliru-binemia from other causes except
A. greenish discoloration of the skinB. involvement of the nasolabial foldsC. predominant involvement of palms, soles, and fore-
head
D. sparing of non-sun-exposed areas of the bodyE. sparing of the sclera
VIII-88.    When evaluating a patient with chronic ascites, a
high (>1.1 g/dL)  serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG)is consistent with all of the following diagnoses except
A. cirrhosisB. congestive heart failureC. constrictive pericarditisD. hepatic vein thrombosisE. nephrosis
VIII-89.    Y ou are managing a patient who complains of ab-
dominal pain. The pain is located in the epigastric areaand radiates to the back. Leaning forward improves thepain. The rest of the physical examination is unremark-able and there is no jaundice. The total bilirubin is 0.7 mg/dL and CA 19-9 level is within the normal range. An ultra-sound of the abdomen shows a 2.5-cm well-circumscribedmass in the tail of the pancreas. There is no ductal dila-tion. A CT scan conﬁrms the presence of a 2.5-cm spicu-lated mass in the tail of the pancreas with no surroundinglymphadenopathy or local extension. What is the nextmost appropriate step in this patient’s management?
A. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
B. Refer for surgical resectionC. Serial CA 19-9 measurementD. Ultrasound-guided biopsyVIII-82. (Continued)
321VIII. DISORDERS OF THE 
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
ANSWERS
VIII-1. The answer is B.   (Chap. 42)   Upper GI bleeding has an in-hospital mortality rate of 5–
10%, with most people dying from their underlying disease rather than exsanguination.
Peptic ulcers are the most common cause of upper GI bleeding requiring hospitalization,accounting for ~50% of cases. Other causes include variceal bleeding, Mallory-Weisstears, erosive disease of the upper GI tract, malignancy, and unidentiﬁed. Characteristicsof the ulcer at endoscopy provide important prognostic information. One-third of pa-tients with an active bleeding vessel or a nonbleeding visible vessel will have rebleedingthat requires surgery. Any ﬁnding other than a clean-based ulcer should prompt admis-sion and monitoring for 3 days, as most rebleeding occurs within 3 days. Finding a clean-based ulcer is reassuring, and if the patient is stable and has no other indication for hos-pitalization, he may be safely discharged.
VIII-2. The answer is C.   (Chap. 302)   Alcoholic cirrhosis is the most common type of cirrhosis
encountered in North America. Unlike some other causes of cirrhosis, pathologically it ischaracterized by small, ﬁne scarring and small regenerative nodules. Therefore, it some-times is referred to as micronodular cirrhosis. There is clear evidence that excessive alco-hol use in the setting of chronic hepatitis C strongly increases the risk of development ofcirrhosis; therefore, screening and appropriate counseling are essential. Ethanol results inproportionally greater inhibition of ALT synthesis than AST synthesis. Therefore, serumAST is usually disproportionately elevated relative to ALT, resulting in a ratio greater than2. The liver is the site of vitamin K–dependent carboxylation of coagulation factors II,VII, IX, and X. Therefore, with progressive deterioration in liver function, elevations inserum prothrombin time result, as the extrinsic pathway of coagulation is primarily de-pendent on tissue factor and factor II. The intrinsic pathway contains many other unaf-fected factors, and the activated partial thromboplastin time is often normal. Unlike thecase in acute viral hepatitis, acetaminophen toxicity, and vascular congestion, alcoholicinjury to the liver rarely elevates the transaminases above levels in the hundreds. Eleva-tions in the AST above 500 to 600 U/L should prompt a search for alternative or coinci-dent diagnoses.
VIII-3. The answer is D.   (Chap. 307)   The pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis evolves in
three phases. During the initial phase, pancreatic injury leads to intrapancreatic activa-tion of digestive enzymes with subsequent autodigestion and acinar cell injury. Acinar in-jury is primarily attributed to activation of zymogens (proenzymes), particularlytrypsinogen, by lysosomal hydrolases. Once trypsinogen is converted to trypsin, the acti-vated trypsin further perpetuates the process by activating other zymogens to further au-todigestion. The inﬂammation initiated by intrapancreatic activation of zymogens leadsto the second phase of acute pancreatitis, with local production of chemokines thatcauses activation and sequestration of neutrophils in the pancreas. Experimental evi-dence suggests that neutrophilic inﬂammation can also cause further activation oftrypsinogen, leading to a cascade of increasing acinar injury. The third phase of acutepancreatitis reﬂects the systemic processes that are caused by release of inﬂammatory cy-tokines and activated proenzymes into the systemic circulation. This process can lead tothe systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome with acute respiratory distress syndrome,extensive third-spacing of ﬂuids, and multiorgan failure.
322 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-4. The answer is D.   (Chap. 307)   Several risk factors have been identiﬁed that predict an
increased risk of death in acute pancreatitis. Pancreatic necrosis and evidence of multior-
gan failure have been the strongest predictors of death in multiple case series. This in-cludes the presence of shock, hypoxemia (Pa
O2 <60 mmHg), renal failure (creatinine >2.0
mg/dL), hemoconcentration with a hematocrit >44%, and gastrointestinal bleeding. Inaddition, other clinical factors including obesity (BMI >30 kg/m
2) and age >70 predict
poorer outcomes. Values of amylase and lipase have not been shown to predict the courseof acute pancreatitis, and amylase can be spuriously elevated in the presence of a pH<7.32. The Ranson criteria include a variety of biochemical markers at admission and at48 h that predict outcome in acute pancreatitis. This patient does not meet any of theRanson criteria at admission (age >55, WBC count >16,000/ µL, glucose >200 mg/dL,
AST >250 U/L, LDH >350 U/L). A reevaluation at 48 h would be necessary to use Ransoncriteria to assess the patient’s risk of death to see if any of the six additional criteria hadbeen fulﬁlled.
VIII-5. The answer is B.   (Chap. 294)   In acute appendicitis, tenderness is invariably present at
some point in the development of the disorder. T enderness to palpation will often occurat McBurney’s point, anatomically located on a line one-third of the way between the an-terior iliac spine and the umbilicus. Abdominal tenderness may be completely absent ifthere is a retrocecal or pelvic appendix, in which case the sole physical ﬁnding may betenderness in the ﬂank. This is the case with the patient in this scenario. The pain whichbegan in the periumbilical region is pathognomonic for appendicitis. The differential di-agnosis of acute appendicitis includes pelvic inﬂammatory disease, mesenteric lymphad-enitis, ruptured ovarian follicle, nephrolithiasis, and pyelonephritis. Pelvic inﬂammatorydisease is less likely because of the history and negative pelvic examination. The urinalysisdoes not suggest pyelonephritis. There is no history of chronic gastrointestinal disorder(e.g., Crohn’s disease) associated with mesenteric lymphadenitis. Ruptured aortic aneu-rysm is not likely in a young person with no history of congenital atherosclerosis andwould most likely present with shock, not inﬂammatory symptoms.
VIII-6. The answer is C.   (Chap. 307)   A diagnosis of pancreatitis is made in an appropriate
clinical setting with abdominal pain radiating to the back and elevated amylase and lip-ase. Although there are many causes of acute pancreatitis, among the most common aremedications, alcohol, and gallstones. This patient does not drink alcohol and right upperquadrant ultrasound does not show cholelithiasis, leaving medications as the likelyetiology. Commonly associated drugs are sulfonamides, estrogens, 6-mercaptopurine,azathioprine, anti-HIV medications, and valproic acid. The patient was taking sulfa-methoxazole, which is a sulfonamide. He should be advised to discontinue this medica-tion, and different Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia prophylaxis should be prescribed.
Alternative regimens include dapsone, aerosolized pentamidine, and atovaquone. Dis-continuation of all Pneumocystis  pneumonia prophylaxis with his degree of immune sup-
pression is unadvisable.
VIII-7. The answer is C.   (Chap. 40)   Most causes of acute diarrhea are infectious. Dehydration
is a feature of all infectious diarrheas and does not suggest bacterial etiology. Fever andbloody diarrhea are more suggestive. Immunocompromised hosts and the elderly are atgreater risk for developing bacteremia and sepsis with certain pathogens, and they alsomay be less likely to have symptoms suggesting a bacterial pathogen. Stool cultures aretypically sent in these populations unless symptoms are mild. See Figure VIII-7.
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 323
VIII-8. The answer is E.   (Chap. 294)   This patient had acute peritonitis secondary to a rup-
tured appendix. Acute peritonitis is associated with decreased intestinal motor activity,
resulting in distention of the intestinal lumen with gas and ﬂuid. The accumulation ofﬂuid in the bowel together with the lack of oral intake leads to rapid intravascular volumedepletion. In the presence of systemic inﬂammation, there is also widespread third spaceloss. In the current case, this manifested as acute renal failure as well as in the cardiac andcentral nervous systems. Ureteral injury is a complication of abdominal surgery, but thispatient’s renal failure predated the procedure. Glomerulonephritis and acute interstitialnephritis are causes of acute renal failure; however, there is no evidence of red cell casts orpyuria. While not mentioned, it is likely that the urine speciﬁc gravity was elevated.
VIII-9. The answer is B.   (Chap. 40)   Rapid transit may accompany many diarrheas as a secondary
or contributing process, but primary dysmotility is an unusual cause of diarrhea. Hormonaland metabolic processes may result in increased motility. Hyperthyroidism is often clinicallyaccompanied by complaints of diarrhea. Medications are a common cause of diarrhea eitheras a primary cause of motility as in the case of “prokinetic” agents such as metoclopramideand erythromycin or as a side effect of bacterial overgrowth as in the case of prolonged antibi-otic administration. Diabetes results in microvascular complications of peripheral and auto-nomic neuropathies and may result in gastroparesis and intestinal dysmotility. Irritable bowelsyndrome is extremely common. It is characterized by disturbed intestinal and colonic motorand sensory responses to various stimuli. Clinically, it is characterized by episodes of consti-pation and diarrhea. Although disturbances in electrolytes may cause changes in intestinalmotility, hypercalcemia is typically associated with constipation, not diarrhea.
VIII-10. The answer is D.   (Chap. 351)   Hemochromatosis is a common disorder of iron storage
in which inappropriate increases in intestinal iron absorption result in excessive depositionin multiple organs but predominantly in the liver. There are two forms: hereditary hemo-chromatosis, in which the majority of cases are associated with mutations of the HFE gene,FIGURE VIII-7 Algorithm for the
management of acute diarrhea. Con-
sider empirical Rx before evaluation
with (*) metronidazole and with (†)
quinolone. WBCs, white blood cells.History and
  physical exam
Moderate  (activities altered) Mild  (unrestricted)
Observe
Resolves Persists*Severe  (incapacitated)
Institute fluid and electrolyte replacement
Fever ≥38.5°, bloody stools,   fecal WBCs,
  immunocompromised or elderly host
Antidiarrheal  agents
Resolves Persists*Stool microbiology  studies
Pathogen foundEvaluate and  treat accordinglyAcute Diarrhea
Likely noninfectious
Likely infectious
Ye s†No
Ye s†No
Select specific  treatment Empirical  treatment + further  evaluation
324 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
and secondary iron overload, which usually is associated with iron-loading anemias such
as thalassemia and sideroblastic anemia. Serum ferritin testing and plasma iron studies canbe very suggestive of the diagnosis, with the ferritin often >500 µg/L and transferrin satu-
ration of 50 to 100%. However, these tests are not conclusive, and further testing is still re-quired for the diagnosis. Although liver biopsy and evaluation for iron deposition or ahepatic iron index (µ g/g dry weight)/56 × age > 2 is the deﬁnitive diagnosis, genetic testing
is widely available today, and because of the high prevalence of HFE gene mutations associ-
ated with hereditary  hemochromatosis, it is recommended for diagnostic evaluation. If thegenetic testing is inconclusive, the invasive liver biopsy evaluation may be indicated.
VIII-11. The answer is C.   (Chap. 305)   Gallstones are very common, particularly in Western
countries. Cholesterol stones are responsible for 80% of cases of cholelithiasis; pigmentstones account for the remaining 20%. Cholesterol is essentially water-insoluble. Stoneformation occurs in the setting of factors that upset cholesterol balance. Obesity, choles-terol-rich diets, high-calorie diets, and certain medications affect biliary secretion of cho-lesterol. Intrinsic genetic mutations in certain populations may affect the processing andsecretion of cholesterol in the liver. Pregnancy results in both an increase in cholesterolsaturation during the third trimester and changes in gallbladder contractility. Pigmentstones are increased in patients with chronic hemolysis, cirrhosis, Gilbert’s syndrome,and disruptions in the enterohepatic circulation. Although rapid weight loss and low-cal-orie diets are associated with gallstones, there is no evidence that a high-protein diet con-fers an added risk of cholelithiasis.
VIII-12. The answer is E.   (Chap. 291)   Anorectal abscess is more prevalent in immunocompro-
mised patients such as those with diabetes, inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), or hema-tologic disorders and in persons who are HIV-positive. They are more common in menthan women and typically occur in young patients. The greatly elevated erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate (ESR) (corrected for age) suggests an inﬂammatory state, and the skinnodules would suggest erythema nodosum. IBD often presents with perianal abscessesand is associated with an elevated ESR, erythema nodosum, and uveitis, among other ex-traintestinal manifestations. Giant cell arteritis would be uncommon in a patient thisyoung. A normal glycosylated hemoglobin makes type 1 diabetes less likely. Acute sarcoi-dosis may present with erythema nodosum (Lofgrens syndrome), but there is typicallymediastinal adenopathy. There is no association between sarcoidosis and perianal ab-scess. While patients with HIV infection commonly develop anorectal abscess, Pneumo-
cystis  pneumonia would typically present with respiratory complaints and an abnormal
radiograph, not erythema nodosum.
VIII-13. The answer is B.   (Chap. 304)   The patient has advanced cirrhosis with a high risk of
mortality as evidenced by his episode of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. His diabetesand remote skin cancers are not absolute contraindications for liver transplantation, butactive alcohol abuse is. The other absolute contraindications to transplantation are life-threatening systemic disease, uncontrolled infections, preexisting advanced cardiac orpulmonary disease, metastatic malignancy, and life-threatening congenital malignancies.Ongoing drug or alcohol abuse is an absolute contraindication, and patients who wouldotherwise be suitable candidates should immediately be referred to appropriate counsel-ing centers to achieve abstinence. Once that is achieved for an acceptable period of time,transplantation can be considered. Indeed, alcoholic cirrhosis accounts for a substantialportion of the patients who undergo liver transplantation.
VIII-14. The answer is E.   (Chap. 298)   Hepatitis A is an acute, self-limited virus that is acquired
almost exclusively via the fecal-oral route. It is classically a disease of poor hygiene andovercrowding. Outbreaks have been traced to contaminated water, milk, frozen raspber-ries and strawberries, green onions, and shellﬁsh. Infection occurs mostly in children andyoung adults. It almost invariably resolves spontaneously and results in lifelong immu-nity. Fulminant disease occurs in ≤0.1% of cases, and there is no chronic form (in con-
trast to hepatitis B and C). Diagnosis is made by demonstrating a positive IgM antibodyto HA V , as described in the case above. An IgG antibody to HA V indicates immunity, ob-
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 325
tained by previous infection or vaccination. A small proportion of patients will experi-
ence relapsing hepatitis weeks to months after a full recovery to HA V infection. This toois self-limited. There is no approved antiviral therapy for hepatitis A disease. An inacti-vated vaccine has decreased the incidence of the disease, and it is recommended for allU.S. children, for high-risk adults, and for travelers to endemic areas. Passive immuniza-tion with immune globulin is also available, and it is effective in preventing clinical dis-ease before exposure or during the early incubation period.
VIII-15. The answer is B.   (Chap. 289)   The location and description of this form of IBD, with-
out mention of other parts of the gastrointestinal tract involved and superﬁcial involve-ment of the mucosa, is highly suggestive of ulcerative colitis (UC). The effects of cigarettesmoking are different on UC and Crohn’s disease (CD). The risk of UC in smokers is lessthan half that of nonsmokers. In contrast, smoking is associated with a twofold risk ofCD. UC is equally common in males and females, whereas CD is more common inwomen. The age distribution is similar for UC and CD. Appendectomy is protective inUC. There is 0% concordance for dizygotic twins in UC and only 6% concordance formonozygotic disease. CD has a substantially higher concordance in monozygotic twins,but a 5% concordance in dizygotic twins.
VIII-16. The answer is D.   (Chap. 291)   The patient has a chronic anal ﬁssure. Anal ﬁssures are
often diagnosed by history alone, with severe anal pain made worse with defecation.There is often mild associated bleeding, but less than that seen with hemorrhoidal bleed-ing. The blood is usually described as staining the toilet paper or coating the stool. Asso-ciated conditions include constipation, trauma, Crohn’s disease, and infections,including tuberculosis and syphilis. Acute anal ﬁssures appear like a linear laceration,whereas chronic ﬁssures show evidence of hypertrophied anal papillae at the proximalend with a skin tag at the distal end. Often the circular ﬁbers of the internal anal sphinc-ter can be seen at the base of the ﬁssure. Acute anal ﬁssures are treated conservatively withincreased dietary ﬁber intake, topical anesthetics or glucocorticoids, and sitz baths. Treat-ment for chronic anal ﬁssures is aimed at ﬁnding methods to decrease anal sphinctertone. T opical nitroglycerin or botulinum toxin injections may be used. In some cases sur-gical therapy becomes necessary with lateral internal sphincterotomy and dilatation.
VIII-17. The answer is C.   (Chap. 40)   Diarrhea is loosely deﬁned as passage of abnormally liquid
or unformed stools and an increased frequency. This patient has pseudodiarrhea, basedon frequent stools, but not diarrhea as they are not loose. Rectal urgency is a commoncomplaint in pseudodiarrhea. The differential diagnosis for pseudodiarrhea includesproctitis and irritable bowel syndrome. Neuromuscular syndromes are linked mostclosely with fecal incontinence, and hypothyroid most commonly leads to constipation.Ulcerative colitis presents with a broad spectrum of symptoms and cannot be entirelyruled out, but bloody diarrhea, fevers, and pain are more typical. Viral gastroenteritis isacute, self-resolving, and causes diarrhea and often nausea.
VIII-18. The answer is E.   (Chap. 287)   Gastric parietal cells create hydrochloric acid through a
process of oxidative phosphorylation involving the H
+-K+-ATPase pump. For each mole-
cule of hydrochloric acid produced, a bicarbonate ion is released into the gastric venouscirculation, creating the “bicarbonate tide.” Control of gastric acid secretion is primarilyunder the control of the parasympathetic system. Postganglionic vagal ﬁbers stimulatemuscarinic receptors on parietal cells to increase acid secretion. In addition, cholinergicstimulation increases gastrin release from antral G cells as well as increasing the sensitiv-ity of parietal cells to circulating gastrin. Gastrin is the most potent stimulus of gastricacid secretion and is released from antral G cells in response to cholinergic stimuli. Hista-mine is also a potent stimulus for gastric acid secretion. It is stored in enterochromafﬁn-like cells in the oxyntic glands of the stomach. Stimuli for histamine release include gas-trin and acetylcholine. Finally, caffeine stimulates gastrin release and thus increases acidsecretion.
The most important protein produced in the stomach for inhibition of acid secretion is
somatostatin. It is produced in the D cells of the antrum, and its release is stimulated by a
326 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
fall in the gastric pH to less than 3.0. Further inhibition of gastric acid secretion is medi-
ated by intestinal peptides secreted from the duodenum in response to acid pH. Thesepeptides include gastric inhibitory peptide and vasoactive intestinal peptide. Finally, hy-perglycemia and hypertonic ﬂuids in the duodenum also inhibit gastric acid secretionthrough mechanisms that are unknown.
VIII-19. The answer is A.   [Chap. 289; Am J Gastroenterol 98(12 Suppl):S31– S36, 2003.]   Collag-
enous colitis is one of the two atypical (microscopic) colitides that should be included inthe differential diagnosis of inﬂammatory bowel disease. The other atypical colitis is lym-phocytic colitis. These diseases present typically with watery diarrhea in 50-to 60-year-old patients. Collagenous colitis is markedly more common in women, whereas lympho-cytic colitis has an equal sex distribution. Both have normal endoscopic appearances andrequire biopsy for diagnosis. Collagenous colitis features increased subepithelial collagendeposition and inﬂammation with increased intraepithelial lymphocytes. In lymphocyticcolitis, there is no collagen deposition and there are greater numbers of intraepitheliallymphocytes than is the case in collagenous colitis. Treatment for collagenous colitisranges from sulfasalazine or mesalamine to glucocorticoids, depending on severity. Lym-phocytic colitis is usually treated with 5-ASA or prednisone.
VIII-20.  and.  VIII-21.   The answers are D and C.   (Chap. 298)   The clinical hallmarks of acute hepa-
titis are rarely subtle and consist of general malaise, abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomit-ing, anorexia, weight loss, headache, fever, and jaundice. After viral infection due to hepatitisB occurs, HBsAg begins to circulate in the blood and is the ﬁrst viral marker present. HBsAgprecedes elevated transaminases and clinical symptoms by several weeks. It becomes unde-tectable within several months of the onset of jaundice. The replicative stage of hepatitis B vi-rus (HBV) infection is the time of maximal infectivity and liver-injury. HBeAg is aqualitative marker of this phase. HBV DNA is a quantitative marker of the infectivity andliver injury phase. Anti-HBc is typically the next detectable viral marker and precedes anti-HBs by weeks to months. As the appearance of anti-HBs is variable, some patients will expe-rience a period of time in which the only detectable serum marker of hepatitis B infectionwill be anti-HBc. In other words, there is a gap, or “window period,” between the disappear-ance of HBsAg and the appearance of anti-HBs. As more sensitive immunoassays have beendeveloped, this window period has become less prevalent. The ﬁgure below demonstratesthe time course of serum markers and clinical symptoms in acute hepatitis B.
VIII-22. The answer is C.   (Chap. 287)   Fasting gastrin levels can be elevated in a variety of con-
ditions including atrophic gastritis with or without pernicious anemia, G-cell hyperpla-sia, and acid suppressive therapy (gastrin levels increase as a consequence of loss ofnegative feedback). The diagnostic concern in a patient with persistent ulcers followingoptimal therapy is Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). The result is not sufﬁcient to make
FIGURE VIII-20/21 Scheme of typical clinical and laboratory features of acute hepatitis B.100 0Jaundice
ALT
HBeAg Anti-HBe
IgG Anti-HBc
HBsAg
IgM Anti-HBcAnti-HBs
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 52
Weeks after exposure
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 327
a diagnosis because gastrin levels may be elevated in a variety of conditions. Elevated
basal acid secretion also is consistent with ZES, but up to 12% of patients with peptic ul-cer disease may have basal acid secretion as high as 15 meq/h. Thus, additional testing isnecessary. Gastrin levels may go up with a meal (>200%) but this test does not distin-guish G-cell hyperfunction from ZES. The best test in this setting is the secretin stimula-tion test. An increase in gastrin levels >200 pg within 15 min of administering 2 µg/kg of
secretin by intravenous bolus has a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of >90% for ZES. Endo-scopic ultrasonography is useful in locating the gastrin-secreting tumor once the positivesecretin test is obtained. Genetic testing for mutations in the gene that encodes the meninprotein can detect the fraction of patients with gastrinomas that are a manifestation ofMultiple Endocrine Neoplasia type I (Wermer’s syndrome). Gastrinoma is the secondmost common tumor in this syndrome behind parathyroid adenoma, but its peak inci-dence is generally in the third decade.
VIII-23. The answer is C.   (Chap. 290)   Although this patient has signs and symptoms consistent
with IBS, the differential diagnosis is large. Few tests are required for patients who havetypical IBS symptoms and no alarm features. In this patient, alarm features include ane-mia, an elevated ESR, and evidence of WBCs in the stool. Alarm features warrant furtherinvestigation to rule out other gastrointestinal disorders such as diverticular disease or in-ﬂammatory bowel disease. Reassurance, stool bulking agents, and antidepressants are alltherapies to consider if a patient does indeed have IBS
VIII-24. The answer is E.   (Chap. 290)   Up to 80% of patients with IBS also have abnormal psy-
chiatric features; however, no single psychiatric diagnosis predominates. The mechanism isnot well understood but may involve altered pain thresholds. Although these patients arehypersensitive to colonic stimuli, this does not carry over to the peripheral nervous system.Functional brain imaging shows disparate activation in, for example, the mid-cingulatecortex, but brain anatomy does not discriminate IBS patients from those without IBS. Anassociation between a history of sexual abuse and IBS has been reported but not with sexu-ally transmitted diseases. Patients with IBS do not have an increased risk of autoimmunity.
VIII-25. The answer is B.   (Chap. 302)   Severe right-sided heart failure may lead to chronic liver
injury and cardiac cirrhosis. Elevated venous pressure leads to congestion of the hepaticsinusoids and of the central vein and centrilobular hepatocytes. Centrilobular ﬁbrosis de-velops, and ﬁbrosis extends outward from the central vein, not the portal triads. Grossexamination of the liver shows a pattern of “nutmeg liver.” Although transaminases aretypically mildly elevated, severe congestion, particularly associated with hypotension,may result in dramatic elevation of AST and ALT 50- to 100-fold above normal. Budd-Chiari syndrome, or occlusion of the hepatic veins or inferior vena cava, may be confusedwith congestive hepatopathy. However, the signs and symptoms of congestive heart fail-ure are absent in patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome, and these patients can be easilydistinguished clinically from those with heart failure. Venoocclusive disease may resultfrom hepatic irradiation and high-dose chemotherapy in preparation for hematopoieticstem cell transplantation. It is not a typical complication of liver transplantation. Al-though echocardiography is a useful tool for assessing left and right ventricular function,ﬁndings may be unimpressive in patients with constrictive pericarditis. A high index ofsuspicion for constrictive pericarditis (e.g., prior episodes of pericarditis, mediastinal ir-radiation) should lead to a right-sided heart catheterization with demonstration of“square root sign,” limitation of right heart ﬁlling pressure in diastole that is suggestive ofrestrictive cardiomyopathy. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may also be helpful indetermining which patients should proceed to cardiac surgery.
VIII-26. The answer is B.   (Chap. 14)   The pain of peritoneal inﬂammation is steady, aching, and
localized predominantly over the affected area(s). Somatic nerves supplying the parietalperitoneum transmit the pain stimulus, allowing localization. The pain of peritoneal in-ﬂammation is invariably accentuated by pressure or changes in tension of the peritoneum.Asking a patient to cough will increase the intraabdominal pressure and lead to reboundtenderness without palpating the abdomen. Another characteristic of peritoneal inﬂam-
328 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
mation is the tonic reﬂex spasm of the abdominal musculature. Costovertebral angle ten-
derness, a sign suggestive of pyelonephritis, and heme-positive stools are neither sensitivenor speciﬁc for peritonitis. The presence or quality of bowel sounds are not reliable physi-cal examination ﬁndings to distinguish an acute abdomen from a more benign diagnosis.
VIII-27. The answer is D.   (Chap. 300)   In the course of acute hepatitis B, HBeAg positivity is
common and usually transient. Persistence of HBeAg in the serum for >3 months indi-cates an increased likelihood of development of chronic hepatitis B. In chronic hepatitisB, presence of HBeAg in the serum indicates ongoing viral replication and increased in-fectivity. It is also a surrogate for inﬂammatory liver injury but not ﬁbrosis.  The develop-ment of antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe) is indicative of the nonreplicative phase of HBVinfection. During this phase, intact virions do not circulate and infectivity is less. Cur-rently, quantiﬁcation of HBV DNA with polymerase chain reaction allows risk stratiﬁca-tion as <10
3 virions/ µL is the approximate threshold for liver injury and infectivity.
VIII-28. The answer is B.   (Chap. 286)   Diffuse esophageal spasm is a disorder of esophageal mo-
tility marked by disorganized nonperistaltic contractions. The contractions are due todysfunction of the inhibitory nerves, with pain correlating with contractions of long du-ration and large amplitude. Clinically, patients present with sharp substernal chest painthat may mimic cardiac disease with radiation to the arms, chest, and jaw. Symptoms lastfor a few seconds to minutes and may be related to swallowing or emotional stress. Dys-phagia with or without pain often coexists. The presence of cardiac disease needs to beevaluated before consideration of a noncardiac cause of chest pain. The diagnostic proce-dure of choice is barium swallow, which shows loss of normal peristaltic contractions be-low the level of the aortic arch. Instead, there are numerous uncoordinated simultaneouscontractions that produce multiple ripples in the esophageal wall with sacculation andpseudodiverticula. This creates the characteristic appearance of a “corkscrew” esophagus.Treatment is aimed primarily at preventing these contractions with medications thatcause smooth muscle relaxation, such as nitrates and calcium channel blockers. Theother options listed describe other diseases of the esophagus. A beaklike appearance ofthe distal esophagus is characteristic of achalasia. Scleroderma causes atrophy of thesmooth muscle within the lower two-thirds of the esophagus and is represented on bar-ium swallow as dilation of the distal esophagus with loss of peristaltic contractions. Gas-troesophageal reﬂux disease is a common disorder that affects 15% of persons at leastonce per week and is marked by loss of lower esophageal sphincter tone with reﬂux ofbarium back into the distal esophagus. Esophageal narrowing with apple-core lesions istypical of esophageal cancer.
VIII-29. The answer is C.   (Chap. 298)   The current hepatitis B vaccine is a recombinant vaccine
consisting of yeast-derived hepatitis B surface antigen particles. A strategy of vaccinatingonly high-risk individuals in the United States has been shown to be ineffective, and uni-versal vaccination against hepatitis B is now recommended. Pregnancy is not a contrain-
dication to vaccination. Vaccination should ideally be performed in infancy. Routineevaluation of hepatitis serologies is not cost-effective and is not recommended. The vac-cine is given in three divided intramuscular doses at 0, 1, and 6 months.
VIII-30. The answer is B.   (Chap. 305)   The clinical presentation is consistent with a cholestatic
picture. Painless jaundice always requires an extensive workup, as many of the underlyingpathologies are ominous and early detection and intervention often offers the only hopefor a good outcome. The gallbladder showed no evidence of stones and the patient showsno evidence of clinical cholecystitis, and so a HIDA scan is not indicated. Similarly, anti-biotics are not necessary at this point. The cholestatic picture without signiﬁcant eleva-tion of the transaminases on the liver function tests makes acute hepatitis unlikely.Antimitochondrial antibodies are elevated in cases of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC),which may present in a similar fashion. However, PBC is far more common in womenthan in men, and the average age of onset is the ﬁfth or sixth decade. The lack of an obvi-ous lesion on CT scan does not rule out a source of the cholestasis in the biliary tree. Ma-lignant causes such as cholangiocarcinoma and tumor of the ampulla of Vater and
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 329
nonmalignant causes such as sclerosing cholangitis and Caroli’s disease may be detected
only by direct visualization with ERCP . ERCP is useful both diagnostically and therapeu-tically as stenting procedures may be done to alleviate the obstruction.
VIII-31. The answer is C.   (Chap. 42)   Randomized controlled trials of IV PPI therapy for upper
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding have shown that this therapy decreased further bleeding,but not mortality, for patients with high-risk ulcers (active bleeding, visible vessel, adher-ent clot) at the time of endoscopy. Instituting IV PPI for all patients with upper GI bleed-ing does not signiﬁcantly improve outcomes. Studies have shown a link between long-term usage of PPIs and osteoporosis, but this does not preclude the acute use of PPI in anosteoporotic patient if there is a compelling indication.
VIII-32. The answer is B.   (Chap. 42)   Hemoglobin/hematocrit levels often do not change acutely
in acute GI bleeding. It may take up to 72 hours to see the hemoglobin fall. Moreover,gastric lavage can be non-bloody in 18% of cases of upper GI bleeding. This is seen whenthere is a duodenal source of bleeding or when the nasogastric tube does not enter thestomach. T esting non-bloody gastric aspirates for occult blood is not useful. Therefore,when there is a clinical suspicion for an upper GI bleed, endoscopy should be performed.CT scanning the abdomen will not be helpful in evaluating an upper GI bleed in the ab-sence of other ﬁndings. Rechecking another hematocrit will not alter the indication forupper endoscopy.
VIII-33.  and .VIII-34.   The answers are D and D.   (Chap. 297)   Gilbert’s syndrome is characterized
by a mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. UGT1A1 activity is typically reduced to 10to 35% of normal, resulting in impaired conjugation. Diagnosis occurs during youngadulthood. Exacerbations occur during times of stress, fatigue, alcohol use, or decreasedcaloric intake. Episodes are self-limited and benign. No treatment is required, and patientreassurance is recommended. Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1 is a congenital diseasecharacterized by more dramatic elevations in bilirubin that occur ﬁrst in the neonatal pe-riod. Dubin-Johnson syndrome is another congenital hyperbilirubinemia. However, it isa predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Medications and toxins may producejaundice in the setting of cholestasis or hepatocellular injury. Similarly, medications mayinduce hemolysis; however, the normal hematocrit, LDH, and haptoglobin eliminatehemolysis as a possibility. Obstructive cholelithiasis is characterized by right upper quad-rant pain that is often exacerbated by fatty meals. The absence of symptoms or elevationin other liver function tests also makes this diagnosis unlikely.
VIII-35. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 39 and 286)   A Zenker’s diverticulum typically causes halitosis
and regurgitation of saliva and particles of food consumed several days earlier. When aZenker’s diverticulum ﬁlls with food, it may produce dysphagia by compressing theesophagus. Gastric outlet obstruction can cause bloating and regurgitation of newly in-gested food. Gastrointestinal disorders associated with scleroderma include esophagealreﬂux, the development of wide-mouthed colonic diverticula, and stasis with bacterialovergrowth. Achalasia typically presents with dysphagia for both solids and liquids. Gas-tric retention caused by the autonomic neuropathy of diabetes mellitus usually results inpostprandial epigastric discomfort and bloating.
VIII-36. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 88 and 295)   The liver is particularly vulnerable to invasion by
tumor cells because of its dual blood supply by the portal vein and the hepatic arteries.Most patients with liver metastases present with symptoms from the primary tumor.Sometimes hepatic involvement is suggested by features of active hepatic disease, includ-ing abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, and ascites. Liver biochemical tests are often the ﬁrstclue to metastatic disease, but the elevations are often mild and nonspeciﬁc. Typically, al-kaline phosphatase is the most sensitive indicator of metastatic disease. Lung, breast, andcolon cancer are the most common tumors that metastasize to the liver. Melanoma, par-ticularly ocular melanoma, also commonly seeds the hepatic circulation. Prostate canceris a much less common cause of hepatic metastases.
330 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-37. The answer is C.   (Chap. 288)   The combination of steatorrhea, weight loss, and migra-
tory large joint arthralgias is consistent with the diagnosis of Whipple’s disease. Whipple’s
disease may also cause cardiac and central nervous system (CNS) disease, including de-mentia. It is caused by chronic infection with T. whippelii . The disease occurs predomi-
nantly in middle-aged white men. Whipple’s disease may also be diagnosed by a smallbowel (or other involved organ) showing macrophages staining positive for PAS and con-taining the small Whipple’s bacillus. Treatment for Whipple’s disease requires prolonged(1 year) therapy with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or chloramphenicol. Antiendomy-sial antibodies, antigliadin IgA antibodies, and the small bowel biopsy ﬁndings describedabove are characteristic of celiac sprue. Antibiotic-associated colitis caused by C. difﬁcile
does not cause steatorrhea.
VIII-38. The answer is D.   [Chap. 289, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 Oct 17;(4)]   Despite be-
ing described as a clinical entity for over a century, the etiology of IBD remains cryptic.Current theory is related to an interplay between inﬂammatory stimuli in genetically pre-disposed individuals. Recent studies have identiﬁed a group of genes or polymorphismsthat confer risk of IBD. Multiple microbiologic agents, including some that reside as“normal” ﬂora, may initiate IBD by triggering an inﬂammatory response. Anaerobic or-ganisms (e.g., Bacteroides  and Clostridia  spp.) may be responsible for the induction of in-
ﬂammation. Other organisms, for unclear reasons, may have the opposite effect. These“probiotic” organisms include Lactobacillus  spp., Biﬁdobacterium  spp., Taenia suis  and
Saccharomyces boulardii .Shigella ,Escherichia , and Campylobacter  spp. are known to pro-
mote inﬂammation. Studies of probiotic therapy in adults and children with IBD haveshown potential beneﬁt for reducing disease activity.
VIII-39. The answer is A.   (Chaps. 44 and 296)   Diagnostic paracentesis is part of the routine
evaluation in a patient with ascites. Fluid should be examined for its gross appearance,protein content, cell count and differential, and albumin. Cytologic and culture studiesshould be performed when one suspects infection or malignancy. The serum-ascites al-bumin gradient (SAG) offers the best correlation with portal pressure. A high gradient(>1.1 g/dL) is characteristic of uncomplicated cirrhotic ascites and differentiates ascitescaused by portal hypertension from ascites not caused by portal hypertension in morethan 95% of cases. Conditions that cause a low gradient include more “exudative” pro-cesses such as infection, malignancy, and inﬂammatory processes. Similarly, congestiveheart failure and nephrotic syndrome cause high gradients. In this patient the SAG is 1.5g/dL, indicating a high gradient. The low number of leukocytes and polymorphonuclearcells makes bacterial or tubercular infection unlikely. Chylous ascites often is character-ized by an opaque milky ﬂuid with a triglyceride level greater than 1000 mg/dL in addi-tion to a low SAG.
VIII-40. The answer is B.   (Chap. 40)   This patient is most likely to have fecal impaction with
overﬂow diarrhea around the impacted area. Colonoscopy is not necessary for diagnosisand may not be needed therapeutically depending on the success of manual disimpac-tion. C. difﬁcile  infection should always be considered in institutionalized persons, partic-
ularly the elderly, even in the absence of antecedent diarrhea. However, a negative stoolantigen carries very good negative predictive value. Stool culture is indicated in the el-derly with moderate to severe diarrhea, but in this case the more likely diagnosis shouldbe ruled out before this is done. Viral gastroenteritis is also possible, but a pathogen istypically not sought as these syndromes self-resolve and there is no available antiviralagent.
VIII-41. The answer is C.   (Chap. 307)   All of the listed choices are causes of acute pancreatitis.
Gallstone disease remains the most common cause, responsible for 30–60% of all acutepancreatitis. The second most common cause of acute pancreatitis is alcohol (15–30%).The risk of pancreatitis in alcoholics is quite low, with only 5 cases of pancreatitis per100,000 individuals. All of the other possible answers each account for <10% of all acutepancreatitis.
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 331
VIII-42. The answer is D.   (Chap. 290)   Serotonin receptor antagonists enhance the sensitivity of
the afferent neurons projecting from the gut. Alosetron, a 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist, re-
duces perception  of painful visceral stimulation, induces rectal relaxation, and delays co-
lonic transport in patients with IBS. Clinical studies have shown the long-term efﬁcacy ofalosetron for IBS. However, in postrelease surveillance, 84 cases of ischemic colitis werereported soon after patients were placed on alosetron. Of these, 44 cases required surgeryand 4 patients died. Most cases developed within 30 days of starting the medication, andmany were within 1 week. Alosetron was withdrawn voluntarily in 2000 but has been re-introduced with a strict monitoring program. Given the temporal relation and compati-ble clinical presentation, that is the most likely diagnosis in this case. A CT scan wouldlikely show diffuse colitis. Therapy involves discontinuation of the drug, supportive ther-apy, and possible surgical resection. The other diagnoses may present with a similar clin-ical picture and should be on the differential diagnosis.
VIII-43. The answer is C.   (Chap. 291)   This patient has symptoms (social isolation), signs (foul
odor), and risk factors (multiparity) for procidentia (rectal prolapse) and fecal inconti-nence. Procidentia is far more common in women than men and is often associated withpelvic ﬂoor disorders. It is not uncommon for these patients to become socially with-drawn and suffer from depression because of the associated fecal incontinence. The foulodor is a result of poor perianal hygiene due to the prolapsed rectum. Although depres-sion in the elderly is an important medical problem, it is too premature in the evaluationto initiate medical therapy for depression. Occult malignancy and thyroid abnormalitiesmay cause fecal incontinence and depression, but a physical examination would be diag-nostic and avoid costly tests. Often patients are concerned they have a rectal mass or car-cinoma. Examination after an enema often makes the prolapse apparent. Medicaltherapy is limited to stool bulking agents or ﬁber. Surgical correction is the mainstay oftherapy.
VIII-44. The answer is B.   (Chap. 302)   The presence of cirrhosis in an elderly woman with no
prior risk factors for viral or alcoholic cirrhosis should raise the possibility of primarybiliary cirrhosis (PBC). It is characterized by chronic inﬂammation and ﬁbrous oblitera-tion of intrahepatic ductules. The cause is unknown, but autoimmunity is assumed asthere is an association with other autoimmune disorders, such as autoimmune thyroidi-tis, CREST syndrome, and the sicca syndrome. The vast majority of patients with symp-tomatic disease are women. AMA is positive in over 90% of patients with PBC and onlyrarely is positive in other conditions. This makes it the most useful initial test in the diag-nosis of PBC. Since there are false-positives, if AMA is positive, a liver biopsy is per-formed to conﬁrm the diagnosis. The 24-h urine copper collection is useful in thediagnosis of Wilson’s disease. Hepatic failure from Wilson’s disease typically occurs be-fore age 50 years. Hemochromatosis may result in cirrhosis. It is associated with lethargy,fatigue, loss of libido, discoloration of the skin, arthralgias, diabetes, and cardiomyopa-thy. Ferritin levels are usually increased, and the most suggestive laboratory abnormalityis an elevated transferrin saturation percentage. Although hemochromatosis is a possiblediagnosis in this case, PBC is more likely in light of the clinical scenario. Althoughchronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C are certainly in the differential diagnosis and must beruled out, they are unlikely because of the patient’s history and lack of risk factors.
VIII-45. The answer is D.   (Chap. 289)   Methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or
anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antibody are reasonable options for patients with CD,depending on the extent of macroscopic disease. Pneumonitis is a rare but serious com-plication of methotrexate therapy. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is an extraintestinalmanifestation of inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD). Pancreatitis is an uncommon com-plication of azathioprine, and IBD patients treated with azathioprine are at fourfold in-creased risk of developing a lymphoma. Anti-TNF antibody therapy is associated withan increased risk of tuberculosis, disseminated histoplasmosis, and a number of otherinfections.
332 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-46. The answer is G.   (Chap. 40)   Chronic constipation occurs from inadequate ﬁber or ﬂuid
consumption, disordered colonic transit, disordered anorectal function due to a neurogas-
troenterologic disorder, drugs, or systemic disorders that impact the gastrointestinal tract.Constipation is more often addressed from a therapeutic position by clinicians. Y et it isimportant not to overlook the fact that constipation can be a presenting feature of a largenumber of medical, surgical, and psychiatric conditions. Therefore, new or severe consti-pation should prompt a complete history and physical examination to ensure a key diag-nosis is not being overlooked.
VIII-47. The answer is B.   (Chap. 291)   This is a classic presentation of familial Mediterranean
fever, an inherited disease most common in Armenians, Arabs, Turks, and non-Ash-kenazi Jews. Febrile episodes begin in early childhood, with more than 90% of patientsexperiencing the ﬁrst attack by age 20. Fever is invariably a feature of an acute attack.Other common features include severe serositis presenting most frequently as peritonitis
or pleuritis. The pain is often so severe that exploratory laparotomy may be performed tosearch for a source of peritonitis. CT imaging shows only small amounts of free ﬂuid inthe abdomen or pleural space. On laboratory testing this ﬂuid represents sterile neutro-philia in response to the intense serosal inﬂammation. Other manifestations of the dis-ease include acute monoarthritis with large sterile, neutrophilic effusions and a rash thatresembles erysipelas on the lower extremity. The attacks are self-limited and resolvewithin 72 h, although the joint symptoms may persist. Amyloidosis as a result of chronicinﬂammation is a common manifestation late in the disease. Laboratory studies are non-speciﬁc, showing changes expected with acute inﬂammation. Diagnosis usually can bemade with clinical criteria alone, although there is gene testing available for the mostcommon mutations that cause the disease. Treatment is targeted at preventing attackswith colchicine, a drug that inhibits microtubule formation and has been demonstratedto decrease the frequency and intensity of the attacks. In addition, it can prevent the de-velopment of amyloidosis. There are no alternative therapies available, although investi-gations into the use of interferon and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors are ongoing.
VIII-48. The answer is A.   (Chap. 298)   A clear distinction between viral etiologies of acute hepati-
tis cannot be made on clinical or epidemiologic features alone. This patient is at risk ofmany forms of hepatitis due to his lifestyle. Given his occupation in food services, from apublic health perspective it is important to make an accurate diagnosis. Serologies must beobtained to make a diagnosis. While hepatitis C virus typically does not present as an acutehepatitis, this is not absolute. Hepatitis E virus infects men and women equally and resem-bles hepatitis A virus in clinical presentation. This patient should be questioned regardingIV drug use, and in addition to hepatitis serologies, an HIV test should be performed.T ABLE VIII-46 Causes of Constipation in Adults
Types of Constipation 
and Causes Examples
Recent onset
Colonic obstruction Neoplasm; stricture: ischemic, diverticular, inﬂammatory
Anal sphincter spasm Anal ﬁssure, painful hemorrhoidsMedications
Chronic
Irritable bowel syndrome Constipation-predominant, alternatingMedications Ca
2+ blockers, antidepressants
Colonic pseudo-obstruction Slow-transit constipation, megacolon (rare Hirsch-
sprung’s, Chagas)
Disorders of rectal evacuation Pelvic ﬂoor dysfunction; anismus; descending perineum 
syndrome; rectal mucosal prolapse; rectocele
Endocrinopathies Hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, pregnancyPsychiatric disorders Depression, eating disorders, drugsNeurologic disease Parkinsonism, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuryGeneralized muscle disease Progressive systemic sclerosis
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 333
VIII-49. The answer is A.   (Chap. 294)   Appendicitis occurs in every 500–2000 pregnancies and
tends to be most common during the second trimester. It is important to consider acute
appendicitis in this population due to the frequent occurrence of mild abdominal discom-fort, nausea, and vomiting during pregnancy. The unremarkable urine analysis makespyelonephritis or nephrolithiasis less likely. Rupture of a Graaﬁan follicle (mittelschmerz)occurs during menses, not pregnancy. Fitz-Hugh–Curtis (perihepatitis) syndrome couldpresent with these symptoms during pregnancy; however, there is no cervicitis on exami-nation, and the initial periumbilical pain makes appendicitis more likely.
VIII-50. The answer is D.   (Chap. 288)   This patient has a stool osmolality gap (measured stool
osmolality – calculated stool osmolality) of <50 mosmol/L, suggesting a secretory ratherthan an osmotic cause for diarrhea. Secretory causes of diarrhea include toxin-mediateddiarrhea (cholera, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli ) and intestinal peptide–mediated diar-
rhea in which the major pathophysiology is a luminal or circulating secretagogue. Thedistinction between secretory diarrhea and osmotic diarrhea aids in forming a differen-tial diagnosis. Secretory diarrhea will not decrease substantially during a fast and has alow osmolality gap. Osmotic diarrhea will generally decrease during a fast and has a high(>50 mosmol/L) osmolality gap. Celiac sprue, chronic pancreatitis, lactase deﬁciency,and Whipple’s disease all cause an osmotic diarrhea.
VIII-51. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 88 and 305)   Cholangiocarcinoma occurs most commonly in
the sixth and seventh decades of life. Patients often present with symptoms and signs ofbiliary obstruction, including right upper quadrant pain, jaundice, and cholangitis. Un-fortunately, most patients present with unresectable disease, and 5-year survival is dis-mal. Diagnosis is often made by cholangiography. Chronic infection with the liver ﬂukesOpisthorchis  and Clonorchis  confers an added risk of cholangiocarcinoma. Similarly, ex-
posure to toxic dyes in the automobile and rubber industries, primary sclerosing cholan-gitis, and congenital malformations of the biliary tree such as choledochal cysts andCaroli disease predispose to the development of cholangiocarcinoma. Cholelithiasis isnot clearly a predisposing factor.
VIII-52. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 88 and 295)   Hepatic adenomas are benign tumors of the liver
found in women in the third and fourth decades. Hormones are thought to play an essen-tial pathophysiologic role. The risk of adenomas is increased among those taking oral con-traceptives, anabolic steroids, and exogenous androgens. These adenomas typically occurin the right lobe and are often asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally. Clinical fea-tures may include pain or a palpable mass. Diagnosis is usually made by a combination ofmodalities, including ultrasound, CT, MRI, and nuclear medicine. The risk of malignanttransformation is low. Surveillance is recommended for asymptomatic small lesions.However, since this patient has signiﬁcant pain, an intervention is necessary. In light of therelationship with hormones and the low risk of malignant transformation, the ﬁrst optionwould be discontinuation of oral contraceptive therapy and follow-up in 4 to 6 weeks. Tu-mors that do not shrink after discontinuation of oral contraceptives may require surgicalexcision. RFA has no established role, and biopsy is not indicated as the clinical picture ishighly suggestive of a benign lesion. Advice should be given to patients with large adeno-mas that pregnancy may exacerbate symptoms and promote hemorrhage.
VIII-53. The answer is C.   (Chap. 307)   Though it is widely used as a screening test to rule out
acute pancreatitis in a patient with acute abdominal or back pain, only about 85% of pa-tients with acute pancreatitis have an elevated serum amylase level. Confounding issuesinclude delay between symptoms and the obtaining of blood samples, the presence ofchronic pancreatitis, and hypertriglyceridemia, which can falsely lower levels of bothamylase and lipase. Because the serum amylase level may be elevated in other conditions,such as renal insufﬁciency, salivary gland lesions, tumors, burns, and diabetic ketoacido-sis, as well as in other abdominal diseases, such as intestinal obstruction and peritonitis,amylase isoenzyme levels have been used to distinguish among these possibilities. There-fore, the pancreatic isoenzyme level can be used to diagnose acute pancreatitis more spe-ciﬁcally in the setting of a confounding condition. The serum lipase assay is less subject to
334 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
confounding variables. However, the sensitivity of the serum lipase level for acute pan-
creatitis may be as low as 70%. Therefore, recommended screening for acute pancreatitisincludes both serum amylase and serum lipase.
VIII-54. The answer is E.   (Chap. 307)   This patient present with acute pancreatitis related to alco-
hol use and has a past history of similar episodes. His presentation does not suggest severepancreatitis. In this setting, 85–90% of patients will recover spontaneously in 3–7 days withconservative management. Analgesics should be given to control pain and will likely alsoaid in decreasing this patient’s blood pressure. In addition, patients with pancreatitis arefrequently volume-depleted due to a variety of factors, including decreased oral intake,vomiting, and third-spacing of ﬂuid with increased vascular permeability. Intravenous vol-ume repletion should be initially given at a high rate to replace volume loss on presentation.After initial volume resuscitation, IV ﬂuids containing glucose should be continued untilthe patient is able to tolerate oral feeding. In mild pancreatitis, no oral alimentation is rec-ommended until pain has adequately resolved, because the time period that NPO status ismaintained is expected to be ≤1 week. In severe cases of pancreatitis, individuals are hyper-
metabolic and are frequently expected to remain NPO for extended periods. In this setting,alimentation with nasojejunal feeding is preferred over total parenteral nutrition as thereappears to be less infection with use of the enteral feedings. This is thought to be due to bet-ter maintenance of the gut mucosal barrier function with enteral feeding. Use of nasogastricsuctioning offers no clinical beneﬁt in mild pancreatitis, and its use is considered elective.
VIII-55.  and.  VIII-56.   The answers are C and D.   (Chap. 294)   The patient presents with several
months of epigastric abdominal pain that is worse after eating. His symptoms are highly sug-gestive of peptic ulcer disease, with the worsening pain after eating suggesting a duodenal ul-cer. The current presentation with acute abdomen and free air under the diaphragmdiagnoses perforated viscus. Perforated gallbladder is less likely in light of the duration ofsymptoms and the absence of the signiﬁcant systemic symptoms that often accompany thiscondition. As the patient is relatively young with no risk factors for mesenteric ischemia, ne-crotic bowel from an infarction is highly unlikely. Pancreatitis can have a similar presentation,but a pancreas cannot perforate and liberate free air. Peritonitis is most commonly associatedwith bacterial infection, but it can be caused by the abnormal presence of physiologic ﬂuids,for example, gastric contents, bile, pancreatic enzymes, blood, or urine, or by foreign bodies.In this case peritonitis most likely is due to the presence of gastric juice in the peritoneal cav-ity after perforation of a duodenal ulcer has allowed these juices to leave the gut lumen.
VIII-57. The answer is C.   (Chap. 286)   The patient has typical symptoms of and barium ﬁnd-
ings for achalasia, an esophageal disease marked by abnormal motility and failure of thelower esophageal sphincter to relax normally with swallowing. The underlying abnor-mality is loss of the intramural neurons that control the inhibitory neurotransmitters.Other diseases that can cause secondary achalasia through destruction of these neuronsinclude Chagas’ disease, malignancy, and viral infections. Typical clinical symptoms ofachalasia include dysphagia with both solids and liquids equally and worsening of symp-toms with emotional stressors and rapid eating. Aspiration and regurgitation of undi-gested food are also common. The presence of esophageal reﬂux symptoms isinconsistent with the diagnosis of achalasia. The course is usually progressive, withweight loss occurring over several months. Diagnosis can be made from the classic ap-pearance on barium swallow of esophageal dilatation with a beaklike appearance of thelower esophagus representing the failure of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) to relax.Other diagnostic maneuvers include manometry demonstrating increased LES tone, andendoscopy should be performed to exclude coincident carcinoma. Treatment is often dif-ﬁcult. Nitrates and calcium channel blockers offer short-term beneﬁts for relief of symp-toms but lose efﬁcacy over time. Endoscopic injections of botulinum toxin are alsoeffective for short periods but may lead to ﬁbrosis with repeated injections. Balloon dila-tation is effective in approximately 85% of patients with the side effect of perforation orbleeding. Finally, some patients ultimately require surgical intervention with myotomy,which has equal success compared to balloon dilatation.
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 335
VIII-58. The answer is B.   (Chap. 289)   Arthritis, typically involving the large joints of the upper
and lower extremities, develops in 15 to 20% of patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD). It is more common in Crohn’s disease (CD) than in ulcerative colitis (UC) andﬂares with disease activity. Treatment is focused on controlling bowel inﬂammation. Ery-thema nodosum and venous thromboembolism also generally correlate with intestinaldisease activity. In contrast, the other extraintestinal manifestations of IBD listed abovetypically do not correlate with disease activity. Ankylosing spondylitis is more commonin CD than in UC and may occur in up to 10% of these patients. The course is often pro-gressive and debilitating. Nephrolithiasis occurs more frequently in CD with ileal diseaseresulting from calcium oxalate stones. Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) occurs in 1 to5% of patients with IBD. Most patients with PSC have IBD. PSC may be detected beforeactive bowel disease and may even occur years after proctocolectomy in patients with UC.T en percent of patients with PSC will develop cholangiocarcinoma. Uveitis is associatedwith UC and CD and may occur during remission or after bowel resection. Withouttimely treatment with corticosteroids, vision loss may ensue.
VIII-59. The answer is D.   (Chap. 39)   The patient’s symptoms are most consistent with an ob-
structive process. The progressive and gradual nature of the process is evident in worsen-ing tolerance for solid foods over the course of months. The patient’s prior partialgastrectomy predisposes him to gastric outlet obstruction as a result of stricture at theprevious anastomosis. In addition, gastric ulcers often undergo malignant transforma-tion. Although the patient has no current symptoms of peptic ulcer disease, underlyingmalignancy with gastric outlet obstruction must be considered as gastric ulcers may de-velop into cancerous lesions if left untreated. Other factors that support the diagnosis ofgastric outlet obstruction are the abdominal x-ray ﬁndings of dilated gastric bubble andthe lack of air in the small bowel. Small bowel obstruction presents acutely with abdomi-nal distention, pain, and vomiting. One would expect to ﬁnd dilated small bowel loopswith air-ﬂuid levels. Gastroparesis is common in poorly controlled diabetic patients,symptomatically affecting approximately 10% of those patients. Frequent vomiting ofpoorly digested food is reported, as in this patient. However, no abnormal ﬁndings areassociated on standard radiography. Finally, cholelithiasis is most often asymptomaticbut can present as biliary colic. There should be associated pain in the right upper quad-rant and epigastrium with eating. Again, the abdominal radiogram is normal in this con-dition with the possible exception of stones seen within the gallbladder.
VIII-60. The answer is E.   (Chap. 39)   Juvenile hamartomatous polyps are lesions that consist of
lamina propria and dilated cystic glands. They are at increased risk of bleeding, but notmalignant transformation. Other polyposis syndromes including familial adenomatouspolyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and Gardner’s syndrome confer increased malignantpotential throughout the GI tract. Gastric adenocarcinoma remains a prevalent malig-nancy worldwide despite signiﬁcant decline in incidence over the last 50 years. The highestincidence of gastric cancer occurs in Japan. A major pathophysiologic risk appears to berelated to bacterial conversion of ingested nitrites into carcinogens in the stomach. Riskfactors for the development of gastric cancer include long-term ingestion of foods withhigh concentrations of nitrite (dried, smoked, salted foods) and conditions that promotebacterial colonization/infection in the stomach, such as Helicobacter  infection, chronic
gastritis, and achlorhydria. Duodenal ulcers are not a risk factor for gastric carcinoma.
VIII-61. The answer is D.   (Chap. 307)   Chronic pancreatitis is a common disorder in any patient
population with relapsing acute pancreatitis, especially patients with alcohol dependence,pancreas divisum, and cystic ﬁbrosis. The disorder is notable for both endocrine and exo-crine dysfunction of the pancreas. Often diabetes ensues as a result of loss of islet cellfunction; though insulin-dependent, it is generally not as prone to diabetic ketoacidosisor coma as are other forms of diabetes mellitus. As pancreatic enzymes are essential to fatdigestion, their absence leads to fat malabsorption and steatorrhea. In addition, the fat-soluble vitamins, A, D, E, and K, are not absorbed. Vitamin A deﬁciency can lead to neu-ropathy. Vitamin B
12, or cobalamin, is often deﬁcient. This deﬁciency is hypothesized to
336 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
be due to excessive binding of cobalamin by cobalamin-binding proteins other than in-
trinsic factor that are normally digested by pancreatic enzymes. Replacement of pancre-atic enzymes orally with meals will correct the vitamin deﬁciencies and steatorrhea. Theincidence of pancreatic adenocarcinoma is increased in patients with chronic pancreati-tis, with a 20-year cumulative incidence of 4%. Chronic abdominal pain is nearly ubiqui-tous in this disorder, and narcotic dependence is common. Niacin is a water-solublevitamin, and absorption is not affected by pancreatic exocrine dysfunction.
VIII-62. The answer is C.   (Chap. 40)   Greasy, foul-smelling stools that are difﬁcult to ﬂush are clas-
sic for fat malabsorption. The diarrhea is caused by the osmotic effects of fatty acids and neu-tral fats. Fat malabsorption syndromes classically lead to weight loss and many vitamindeﬁciencies, including iron, vitamin B
12, vitamin D, and vitamin K. Pancreatic insufﬁciency
must be considered in cases of malabsorption, but destruction of the organ must be near totalfor this to occur, usually in the setting of long-standing alcohol abuse. Celiac disease affects1% of Americans, often presents with symptoms similar to those of irritable bowel syndrome,and requires an endoscopy with biopsy to conﬁrm the diagnosis. Other causes of steatorrheainclude bacterial overgrowth, bariatric surgery, liver disease, and Whipple’s disease. A 24-hstool collection is a formal way to conﬁrm steatorrhea, though a consistent patient historymay be adequate to begin evaluation. Small-intestinal disease typically will result in fecal fatof ~15–25 g/day, and pancreatic exocrine insufﬁciency may result in >30 g/day.
VIII-63. The answer is A.   (Chap. 307)   This patient likely has chronic pancreatitis related to
long-standing alcohol use, which is the most common cause of chronic pancreatitis inadults in the United States. Chronic pancreatitis can develop in individuals who consumeas little as 50 g of alcohol daily (equivalent to ~30–40 ounces of beer). The patient’s de-scription of his loose stools is consistent with steatorrhea, and the recurrent bouts of ab-dominal pain are likely related to his pancreatitis. In most patients, abdominal pain is themost prominent symptom. However, up to 20% of individuals with chronic pancreatitispresent with symptoms of maldigestion alone. The evaluation for chronic pancreatitisshould allow one to characterize the pancreatitis as large- vs. small-duct disease. Large-duct disease is more common in men and is more likely to be associated with steatorrhea.In addition, large-duct disease is associated with the appearance of pancreatic calciﬁca-tions and abnormal tests of pancreatic exocrine function. Women are more likely to havesmall-duct disease, with normal tests of pancreatic exocrine function and normal ab-dominal radiography. In small-duct disease, the progression to steatorrhea is rare, andthe pain is responsive to treatment with pancreatic enzymes. The characteristic ﬁndingson CT and abdominal radiograph of this patient are characteristic of chronic pancreati-tis, and no further workup should delay treatment with pancreatic enzymes. Treatmentwith pancreatic enzymes orally will improve maldigestion and lead to weight gain, butthey are unlikely to fully resolve maldigestive symptoms. Narcotic dependence can fre-quently develop in individuals with chronic pancreatitis due to recurrent and severebouts of pain. However, as this individual’s pain is mild, it is not necessary to prescribenarcotics at this point in time. An ERCP or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogra-phy (MRCP) may be considered to evaluate for a possible stricture that is amenable totherapy. However, sphincterotomy is a procedure performed via ERCP that may be usefulin treating pain related to chronic pancreatitis and is not indicated in the patient. Angiog-raphy to assess for ischemic bowel disease is not indicated as the patient’s symptoms arenot consistent with intestinal angina. Certainly, weight loss can occur in this setting, butthe patient usually presents with complaints of abdominal pain after eating and pain thatis out of proportion with the clinical examination. Prokinetic agents would likely onlyworsen the patient’s malabsorptive symptoms and are not indicated.
VIII-64. The answer is D.   (Chaps. 88 and 300)   Hepatocelluar carcinoma (HCC) is one of the
most common tumors in the world. Its high prevalence in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa isrelated to the prevalence of chronic hepatitis B infection in those areas. The rising incidencein the United States is related to the presence of chronic hepatitis C. It is more common inmen than in women and usually arises from a cirrhotic liver. The incidence peaks in the
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 337
ﬁfth and sixth decades of life in Western countries but one to two decades earlier in regions
of Asia and Africa. Chronic liver disease with other etiologies, such as hemochromatosis,primary biliary cirrhosis, and alcoholic cirrhosis, also carries an increased risk of HCC. Pa-tients often present with an enlarging abdomen in the setting of chronic liver failure. α Feto-
protein levels may be elevated. The primary treatment modality is surgery. Surgicalresection offers the best hope for a cure. In cases in which there are multiple lesions or resec-tion is technically not feasible, other options, such as radiofrequency ablation, may be tried.Liver transplantation in selected patients offers a survival that is the same as the survival af-ter transplantation for nonmalignant liver disease. Chemoembolization may confer a sur-vival beneﬁt in patients with nonresectable disease. Systemic chemotherapy is generally noteffective and is reserved for palliation when other, more local strategies have been tried.
VIII-65. The answer is E.   (Chap. 40)   Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks is considered chronic. Most causes
of chronic diarrhea are noninfectious. They can be grouped into secretory, osmotic, steator-rheal, inﬂammatory, dysmotility, factitious, and iatrogenic causes. Secretory diarrheas aredue to altered ﬂuid or electrolyte transport across the enterocolonic mucosa. They typicallyare large-volume stools that persist with fasting and occur during the night. Stimulant laxa-tives such as bisacodyl, cascara, castor oil, and senna are very common offending agents forsecretory diarrhea. Therefore, the patient’s complete (not just prescribed) medication listshould always be reviewed before engaging on an expensive search for causes of chronic diar-rhea. Countless medications may cause diarrhea; common offenders include antibiotics andantihypertensives. Lactose intolerance is a common cause of osmotic diarrhea. Carcinoid,vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumors, medullary thyroid carcinoma, gastri-noma, and villous adenoma are uncommon tumors that are on the differential diagnosis ofsecretory diarrhea. Crohn’s disease can lead to bile salt–induced secretory diarrhea as a pre-senting feature, but this is less common than its usual presentation as an inﬂammatory diar-rhea. Lymphocytic colitis is an inﬂammatory disease that causes diarrhea in the elderly.
VIII-66. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 299 and e35)   Drug-induced liver injury is common. Acetamin-
ophen is one of the most common causes of drug-induced injury. It is often ingested in sui-cide attempts or accidentally by children. Acetaminophen is metabolized by a phase IIreaction to innocuous sulfate and glucuronide metabolites. However, a small proportion ofacetaminophen is metabolized by a phase I reaction to a hepatoxic metabolite, N-acetylben-
zoquinone-imide (NAPQI). When excessive amounts of NAPQI are formed, glutathionelevels are depleted and covalent binding of NAPQI is thought to occur, with hepatocytemacromolecules leading to hepatic injury. Patients often present with confusion, abdominalpain, and sometimes shock. Treatment includes gastric lavage, activated charcoal, and sup-portive measures. The risk of toxicity is derived from a nomogram plot where acetamino-phen plasma levels are plotted against time after ingestion. In this patient the level was above200µg/mL at 4 h, indicating a risk of toxicity. Therefore, N-acetylcysteine, a sulfhydryl com-
pound, is administered as a reservoir of sulfhydryl groups to support the reserves of glu-tathione. Normal liver function tests at the time of presentation do not indicate a benigncourse. Rather, patients must be observed for a period of days as the hepatic toxicity andtransaminitis may manifest 4 to 6 days after the initial ingestion. Alkalinization plays norole. However, in patients who develop signs of hepatic failure (e.g., progressive jaundice,coagulopathy, confusion), liver transplantation is the only established option.
VIII-67. The answer is E.   (Chap. 291)   Surgical therapy is indicated in all low-risk surgical patients
with complicated diverticular disease. Patients with at least two episodes of diverticulitis re-quiring hospitalization, with disease that does not respond to medical therapy, or who de-velop intra-abdominal complications are considered to have complicated disease.Complicating this patient’s relapse of diverticulitis is probably an enterovesicular ﬁstulacausing pneumaturia. Studies indicate that younger patients (<50 years) may experience amore aggressive form of the disease than older patients, and therefore waiting for more thantwo attacks before considering surgery is not recommended. Rifaximin is a poorly absorbedbroad-spectrum antibiotic that, when combined with a ﬁber-rich diet, is associated with lessfrequent symptoms in patients with uncomplicated diverticular disease. Pneumaturia repre-sents a potential surgical urgency and should not be confused with proteinuria.
338 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-68. The answer is A.   (Chap. 291)   Hemorrhage from a colonic diverticulum is the most
common cause of hematochezia in patients >60 years of age. Patients with atherosclerosis,
hypertension, and increased bleeding risk are most commonly affected. Most bleeds areintense, but are self-limited and stop spontaneously. They usually arise from the right co-lon. The lifetime risk of rebleeding is 25%. While colonoscopy can be both diagnostic andtherapeutic in lower GI bleeding, the ability to visualize the mucosa is limited when thebleeding is brisk. Angiography can localize the bleeding and, if the patient is stable, bleed-ing is best managed by mesenteric angiography. If identiﬁed, the bleeding vessel may besuccessfully occluded with a coil in 80% of cases with <10% risk of colonic ischemia. Thispatient is normotensive and has a normal heart rate, suggesting that he is stable for angi-ography. Surgery is reserved for patients with unstable bleeding or a >6 unit/24 h bleedingepisode.
VIII-69. The answer is E.   (Chap. 300)   Although chronic active hepatitis may be associated with
extraintestinal manifestations (e.g., arthritis) and the presence in the serum of autoantibodies(e.g., anti-smooth-muscle antibody), these factors are not invariably present. The distinctionbetween chronic active hepatitis and chronic persistent hepatitis can be established only bydoing a liver biopsy. In chronic active hepatitis there is piecemeal necrosis (erosion of the lim-iting plate of hepatocytes surrounding the portal triads), hepatocellular regeneration, and ex-tension of inﬂammation into the liver lobule; these features are not seen in chronic persistenthepatitis. Both diseases may be associated with serologic evidence of hepatitis B infection.
VIII-70. The answer is B.   (Chap. 40)   Campylobacter  and Shigella  are associated with bloody di-
arrhea. Fecal-oral transmission and exposure to undercooked poultry products areroutes of transmission. Although bloody diarrhea is a common occurrence in amebicdysentery, patients may develop extraintestinal manifestations in the liver, lungs, heart,and brain. Enterotoxigenic E. coli  causes a watery diarrhea, but enterohemorrhagic E.
coliO157:H7 (often from undercooked hamburger) may cause a severe dysentery and the
development of hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Cryptosporidiosis is a common cause ofdiarrhea in immunodeﬁcient individuals. It causes a profuse watery diarrhea with mu-cus, but blood and fecal leukocytes are extremely rare.
VIII-71. The answer is A.   (Chap. 286)   This patient has symptoms of esophagitis. In patients
with HIV various infections can cause this disease, including herpes simplex virus(HSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), Candida , and HIV itself.
The lack of thrush does not rule out Candida  as a cause of esophagitis, and EGD is neces-
sary for diagnosis. CMV classically causes serpiginous ulcers in the distal esophagus thatmay coalesce to form large giant ulcers. Brushings alone are insufﬁcient for diagnosis,and biopsies must be performed. Biopsies reveal intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclu-sions with enlarged nuclei in large ﬁbroblasts and endothelial cells. Intravenous ganciclo-vir is the treatment of choice, and valganciclovir is an oral preparation that has beenintroduced recently. Foscarnet is useful in treating ganciclovir-resistant CMV .
Herpes simplex virus manifests as vesicles and punched-out lesions in the esophagus
with the characteristic ﬁnding on biopsy of ballooning degeneration with ground-glasschanges in the nuclei. It can be treated with acyclovir or foscarnet in resistant cases. Can-
dida  esophagitis has the appearance of yellow nodular plaques with surrounding ery-
thema. Treatment usually requires ﬂuconazole therapy. Finally, HIV alone can causeesophagitis that can be quite resistant to therapy. On EGD these ulcers appear deep andlinear. Treatment with thalidomide or oral glucocorticoids is employed, and highly activeantiretroviral therapy should be considered.
VIII-72. The answer is A.   (Chap. 298)   In healthy adults without a previous history of liver disease,
complete recovery from acute hepatitis B infection occurs in about 99% of cases. In this popula-tion, including the patient described above, antiviral treatment is unlikely to improve this excel-lent prognosis and should be avoided. A resolved infection will induce lifelong immunity, and avaccine series is not necessary. Based on experience with antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis Binfection, some practitioners will treat severe cases of acute hepatitis B with antivirals such aslamivudine or entecavir, though there are no clinical trials in this patient population.
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 339
VIII-73. The answer is C.   (Chap. 288)   The patient’s symptoms are consistent with bacterial
overgrowth in the afferent loop. These patients complain of abdominal bloating and pain
20 min to 1 h after eating. There may be associated vomiting. In addition, malabsorptivediarrhea is common and ceases with fasting. The report of foul-smelling diarrhea thatﬂoats should prompt an evaluation for fat malabsorption. This patient also has a macro-cytic anemia, which can result from vitamin B
12 deﬁciency.
Many other complications have been noted after surgery for peptic ulcer disease.
Dumping syndrome refers to a spectrum of vasomotor symptoms that occur after pepticulcer surgery, including tachycardia, light-headedness, and diaphoresis. It can occurwithin 30 min of eating and is related to rapid delivery of hyperosmolar contents to theproximal small intestine, resulting in large ﬂuid shifts. A late dumping syndrome can alsooccur, with similar symptoms developing 90 min to 3 h after eating. It is related to mealscontaining large amounts of simple carbohydrates and thus causes insulin surges and hy-poglycemia. Bile reﬂux gastropathy presents after partial gastrectomy with abdominalpain, early satiety, and vomiting. Histologic examination reveals minimal inﬂammationbut extensive epithelial injury. Treatment consists of prokinetic agents and bile acid se-questrants. Finally, postvagotomy diarrhea occurs in 10% of patients after peptic ulcersurgery. These patients usually complain of severe diarrhea that occurs 1 to 2 h aftermeals. Abdominal bloating and malabsorption are not usually part of this syndrome.
VIII-74. The answer is E.   (Chap. 288)   This patient most likely has primary lactase deﬁciency.
Carbohydrates in the diet are composed of starches, disaccharides (lactose, sucrose), andglucose. Only monosaccharides (glucose, galactose) are absorbed in the small intestine sothat starches and disaccharides must be digested before absorption. Starches are digested byamylase (pancreatic > salivary). Lactose, the disaccharide present in milk, requires digestionby brush border lactase into glucose and galactose. Lactase is present in the intestinal brushborder in all species during the postnatal period but disappears except in humans. Thereare marked racial differences in the persistence of lactase, with Asians having among thehighest prevalence of lactase deﬁciency and Northern Europeans having the lowest preva-lence. In primary lactase deﬁciency other aspects of intestinal nutrient absorption andbrush border function are normal. Symptoms usually arise in adolescence or adulthoodand consist of diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramps, bloating, and ﬂatus after the consump-tion of milk products. The differential diagnosis includes irritable bowel syndrome. Treat-ment involves avoidance of foods with a high lactose content (milk, ice cream) and use oforal galactosidase (“lactase”) enzyme replacement. The efﬁcacy of the enzyme replacementtreatments varies with the product, the food, and the individual. Cholestyramine is usefulin cases of bile acid diarrhea. Viokase is used in patients with chronic pancreatic insufﬁ-ciency (chronic pancreatitis, resection, cystic ﬁbrosis) and contains amylase, protease, andlipase. Metoclopramide is a promotility agent and will not help symptoms of lactase deﬁ-ciency. Omeprazole is a proton pump inhibitor and will decrease gastric acid secretion.
VIII-75. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 298 and 300)   Causes of extreme elevations in serum transam-
inases generally fall into a few major categories, including viral infections, toxic inges-tions, and vascular/hemodynamic causes. Both acute hepatitis A and hepatitis Binfections may be characterized by high transaminases. Fulminant hepatic failure may
Primary Lactase Deﬁciency in Different Adult Ethnic Groups
Ethnic Group Prevalence of Lactase Deﬁciency, %
Northern European 5–15
Mediterranean 60–85
African black 85–100
American black 45–80
American Caucasian 10–25
Native American 50–95
Mexican American 40–75
Asian 90–100
Source:  From FJ Simons: The geographic hypothesis and lactose malabsorption. A weighing of the evi-
dence. Am J Dig Dis 23:963, 1978.
340 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
occur, particularly in situations in which acute hepatitis A occurs on top of chronic hepa-
titis C infection or if hepatitis B and hepatitis D are cotransmitted. Most cases of acutehepatitis A or B infection in adults are self-limited. Hepatitis C is an RNA virus that doesnot typically cause acute hepatitis. However, it is associated with a high probability ofchronic infection. Therefore, progression to cirrhosis and hepatoma is increased in pa-tients with chronic hepatitis C infection. Extreme transaminitis is highly unlikely withacute hepatitis C infection. Acetaminophen remains one of the major causes of fulminanthepatic failure and is managed by prompt administration of N-acetylcysteine. Budd-Chiari syndrome is characterized by posthepatic thrombus formation. It often presentswith jaundice, painful hepatomegaly, ascites, and elevated transaminases.
VIII-76. The answer is C.   (Chap. e25)   The endoscopic picture demonstrates typical pseudomem-
branous colitis with yellow adherent pseudomembranes that appear raised and measure upto 1 cm. Pseudomembranous colitis is the pathologic manifestation of extensive infectionwith Clostridium difﬁcile , as not all patients who develop diarrheal illness due to C. difﬁcile
will show evidence of colitis, with or without pseudomembranes present. Pathologicallypseudomembranes consist of ﬁbropurulent debris that adheres to the damaged colonicmucosa. Pseudomembranes may develop in other causes of colitis, including ischemic coli-tis. The pseudomembranes of C. difﬁcile  colitis are unique, however, because of features
seen by microscopic examination. The surface epithelium is denuded, and the underlyingcolonic mucosa is diffusely inﬁltrated with neutrophils. The colonic crypts are distended bymucopurulent material that becomes the pseudomembranes when the crypts rupture. Is-chemic colitis may rarely form pseudomembranes that appear similar on colonoscopy, andit may be difﬁcult to differentiate pseudomembranous colitis from ischemic colitis fromthat caused by C. difﬁcile . However, in this case, the patient’s clinical presentation is more
consistent with C. difﬁcile  colitis than ischemic colitis. In addition, the recent administra-
tion of ﬂuoroquinolone antibiotics should raise the suspicion of C. difﬁcile  infection. A
more typical appearance of ischemic colitis on colonoscopy is patchy mucosal edema withbluish discoloration and subepithelial hemorrhage. Salmonella causes ileitis and colitis withmarked mucosal edema and enlargement of Peyer’s patches. Pseudomembrane formation isnot common. Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease would not typically producepseudomembranes, but would be associated with deep ulcerations of the mucosa, whichare not apparent here. Diverticular disease is not demonstrated on the endoscopic picture.
VIII-77. The answer is A.   (Chap. 43)   The van den Bergh reaction is commonly used to identify the
concentration of conjugated (direct) and total bilirubin. One shortcoming of this method isthe inability to differentiate the fraction of conjugated bilirubin that is bound to albumin. Al-bumin-linked bilirubin (biliprotein) has a longer half-life (12–14 days) in the serum than thefree form (4 h), which accounts for one of the enigmas of jaundiced patients with liver dis-ease: the elevated serum bilirubin level declines more slowly than expected in some patientswho are otherwise recovering well. Hepatobiliary function is not impaired in these patients.
VIII-78. The answer is A.   (Chap. 43)   Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin in the reticuloendothelial
system. Bilirubin is insoluble in serum and must be bound to albumin before it can be trans-ported to the liver. At the hepatocyte, bilirubin is able to passively be absorbed and reach theendoplasmic reticulum. The enzyme glutathione S-transferase B appears to reduce efﬂux ofbilirubin out of the hepatocyte. In the endoplasmic reticulum, bilirubin is conjugated to glu-curonic acid yielding bilirubin mono- and diglucuronide. Conjugated bilirubin is trans-ported into the bile canalicular system via an active process by multiple drug resistanceprotein 2. In the terminal ileum, bacterial glucuronidases unconjugate the conjugated biliru-bin. Unconjugated bilirubin is further reduced into urobilinogen in the terminal ileum.Most (80–90%) of the urobilinogen is excreted in the feces. The remaining 10–20% are pas-sively absorbed into the portal venous blood and either reexcreted by the liver or the kidney.
VIII-79. The answer is A.   (Chap. 44)   In patients with chronic cirrhosis who develop new or
worsening ascites without dietary or medication nonadherence, another occult disordermay be the reason. Common disorders that cause this phenomenon include portal veinthrombosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, portal vein thrombosis, bacterial peritonitis, alco-
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 341
holic hepatitis, viral infection, and peritoneal tuberculosis. An elevated WBC count is more
common when there is a neoplasm, bacterial peritonitis, or tuberculosis. The predomi-nance of lymphocytes raises the suspicion for tuberculosis. The SAAG is classically low incases of tuberculous peritonitis but may be high when there is concomitant cirrhosis andtransudative ascites. The sensitivity of the adenosine deaminase activity is characteristicallypoor in patients with cirrhosis due to poor T cell–mediated response, therefore, peritonealbiopsy or visual diagnosis during laparoscopy are likely to be required for diagnosis.
VIII-80. The answer is C.   (Chap. 43)   When evaluating a patient with jaundice, initial steps in-
clude determining whether the hyperbilirubinemia is predominantly unconjugated orconjugated and whether there is any other laboratory evidence of hepatobiliary dysfunc-tion. When there are associated biochemical liver abnormalities, further discriminationinto a predominantly cholestatic or hepatocellular pattern is possible. A hepatocellularpattern, as in this example characterized by ALT/AST elevated out of proportion to thealkaline phosphatase, should prompt a search for viral, autoimmune, toxicologic, and ab-normal deposition disease. Acetaminophen is a common cause of mental status change,jaundice, and hepatocellular injury in the intensive care unit. Liver biopsy may ultimatelybecome necessary. Anatomic abnormalities are more common when there is a cholestaticpattern of injury characterized by an elevated alkaline phosphatase out of proportion tothe AST/ALT. In those cases, ultrasound and possible ERCP may be indicated.
FIGURE VIII-80 Evaluation of
the patient w ith jaundice. MRCP ,
magnetic resonance cholangiopan-
creatography; ALT, alanine amino-
transferase; AST, aspartate amino-transferase; SMA, smooth-muscleantibody; AMA, antimitochon-
drial antibody; LKM, liver-kidney
microsomal antibody; SPEP , serumprotein electrophoresis; CMV , cy-tomegalovirus; EBV , Epstein-Barrvirus. Tables cited are from Harri-son’s, 17e, Chap. 43. History (focus on medication/drug exposure)
    Physical examination    Lab tests: Bilirubin with fractionation,    ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase,      prothrombin time, and albumin
Isolated elevation  of the bilirubin
Indirect  hyperbilirubinemia  (direct < 15%)See Table 43-1Direct  hyperbilirubinemia    (direct > 15%)    See Table 43-1
Drugs    Rifampicin    ProbenecidInherited disorders    Dubin-Johnson      syndrome    Rotor's syndrome1. Viral serologies        Hepatitis A IgM        Hepatitis B surface            antigen and core            antibody (IgM)        Hepatitis C RNA2. Toxicology screen      Acetaminophen level3. Ceruloplasmin (if      patient less than 40      years of age)4. ANA, SMA, LKM, SPEP
Inherited disorders    Gilbert's syndrome    Crigler-Najjar syndromes
Hemolytic disordersIneffective erythropoiesisBilirubin and other  liver tests elevated
Hepatocellular pattern:  ALT/AST elevated out  of proportion to  alkaline phosphatase  See Table 43-2Cholestatic pattern:  Alkaline phosphatase  out of proportion  ALT/AST  See Table 43-3
Dilated ductsExtrahepatic  cholestasis
CT/ERCP
Liver biopsy
Liver biopsyMRCP/Liver biopsyResults
negativeResults
negativeAdditional virologic testing    CMV DNA, EBV capsid      antigen    Hepatitis D antibody      (if indicated)    Hepatitis E IgM      (if indicated)Results
negative
AMApositiveSerologic testing    AMA    Hepatitis serologies    Hepatitis A, CMV, EBVReview drugs (see Table 43-3)Ultrasound
Ducts not dilatedIntrahepatic cholestasisALGORITHM FOR PATIENT WITH JAUNDICE
342 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-81. The answer is C.   (Chap. 43)   Unconjugated bilirubin is always bound to albumin in the
serum, is not ﬁltered by the kidney, and is not found in the urine. Therefore, any biliru-
bin found in the urine must be conjugated to glucuronic acid. The presence of bilirubin-uria implies the presence of liver disease. Defects that cause elevated levels ofunconjugated bilirubin will not cause bilirubinuria. A defect in bilirubin production willnot cause bilirubinuria.
VIII-82. The answer is A.   (Chap. 292)   Mesenteric ischemia is a relatively uncommon and highly
morbid illness. Acute mesenteric ischemia is usually due to arterial embolus (usuallyfrom the heart) or from thrombosis in a diseased vascular bed. Major risk factors includeage, atrial ﬁbrillation, valvular disease, recent arterial catheterization,  and recent myo-cardial infarction. Ischemia occurs when the intestines are inadequately perfused by thesplanchnic circulation. This blood supply has extensive collateralization and can receiveup to 30% of the cardiac output, making poor perfusion an uncommon event. Patientswith acute mesenteric ischemia will frequently present with pain out of proportion totheir initial physical examination. As ischemia persists, peritoneal signs and cardiovascu-lar collapse will follow. Mortality is >50%. While radiographic imaging can suggest is-chemia, the gold standard for diagnosis is laparotomy.
VIII-83. The answer is B.   (Chap. 43)   Causes of isolated unconjugated (indirect) hyperbilirubin-
emia include inherited (sickle cell disease, spherocytosis, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogen-ase deﬁciency) and acquired (microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, paroxysmal nocturnalhemoglobinuria, immune hemolysis) hemolytic disorders, ineffective erythropoiesis (nu-tritional deﬁciencies), inherited conditions (Gilbert’s syndrome, Crigler-Najjar types I andII), and drugs (probenecid, ribavirin, rifampicin). Inherited hemolytic disorders withchronic hemolysis carry a high risk of developing calcium bilirubinate gallstones. Patientswith hemolytic disorders that cause excessive heme production seldom have a serum biliru-bin >5 mg/dL. Higher levels may occur during acute hemolytic conditions (sickle cell crisis)or with concomitant renal or hepatocellular disease. Probenecid (used to treat gout) andrifampicin cause unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia by diminishing hepatic uptake of bil-irubin. Cryoglobulinemia is associated with hepatitis C infection which, if present, is asso-ciated with a mild hepatocellular pattern of injury and an elevated direct bilirubin.
VIII-84. The answer is A.   (Chap. 89)   Ductal adenocarcinomas of the exocrine pancreas are the
most common type (>90%) of pancreatic neoplasm. The pancreatic head is the mostcommon site. The median age of diagnosis is 72 years, with the peak incidence between65 and 85 years. The incidence is slightly higher in men than women and in AfricanAmericans than Caucasians. Pancreatic carcinoma is uncommon below the age of 50.These tumors are aggressive and usually present with locally inoperable disease with localand distal metastases. The 5-year survival is only about 5%. It is the fourth leading causeof cancer death. Other less common types of pancreatic neoplasms include islet cell tu-mors and neuroendocrine tumors.
VIII-85. The answer is B.   (Chap. 44)   A carefully performed physical examination can reveal im-
portant clues concerning the etiology of abdominal swelling. Ascites and increased intra-peritoneal pressure will produce stretched skin, bulging ﬂanks, and an everted umbilicusregardless of the etiology of the ascites. Auscultating a venous hum at the umbilicus maysignify portal hypertension with increased collateral blood ﬂow around the liver but maynot distinguish distal hepatic venous or superior vena cava obstruction. Prominent ab-dominal venous pattern with the direction of ﬂow away from the umbilicus often reﬂectsportal hypertension. Collateral venous ﬂow from the lower abdomen to the umbilicussuggests inferior vena cava obstruction. Flow from the upper abdomen downward to-ward the umbilicus suggests superior vena cava obstruction. A pulsatile liver is classicallydescribed in severe tricuspid regurgitation.
VIII-86. The answer is E.   (Chap. 89)   When ﬁrst-line therapy for pancreatic cancer has failed,
ﬁt patients should be referred for enrollment in clinical trials to identify novel thera-peutic agents. Gemcitabine has been shown to be superior to treatment with 5-ﬂuoro-
VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS 343
uracil. Patients with little life expectancy or who have a poor functional status may
beneﬁt by incorporating palliative or hospice care into their treatment plan. Externalbeam chemoradiotherapy may be helpful when the disease is locally advanced andcausing signiﬁcant morbidity. Debulking surgery has no role in the treatment of ad-vanced pancreatic cancer since the risk of the procedure is similar to that of a curativeresection and offers no survival beneﬁt. Biliary stenting is useful for relieving obstruc-tive jaundice.
VIII-87. The answer is D.   (Chap. 43)   Jaundice that is not due to hyperbilirubinemia may be
caused by excessive carotene ingestion, the use of quinacrine, and excessive exposure tophenols. In carotenoderma, the ingested pigment is predominantly deposited in thepalms, soles, forehead, and nasolabial folds. The jaundice of carotenoderma, but notquinacrine usage, spares the sclera. The nasolabial folds can be involved in any cause ofjaundice. When there is jaundice, skin pigment deposition does not depend on sun expo-sure. Over time, with bilirubin deposition, sun exposure oxidizes bilirubin to biliverdincausing a green discoloration of the skin in light-skinned patients.
VIII-88. The answer is E.   (Chap. 44)   The serum-ascites albumin gradient correlates directly
with portal pressure. A SAAG >1.1 g/dL is characteristic of portal hypertension with>97% accuracy. A low SAAG (<1.1 g/dL) indicates the patient does not have portal hy-pertension with >97% accuracy. Occult cirrhosis, intrahepatic sinusoidal destruction,massive hepatic metastases, Budd-Chiari syndrome, right-sided cardiac valve disease,right-sided heart failure, and constrictive pericarditis should be considered when evalu-ating new-onset ascites with a high SAAG without clear etiology.
T ABLE VIII-88  Characteristics of Ascitic Fluid in V arious Disease States 
ConditionGross 
Appearance Protein, g/LSerum-Ascites AlbuminGradient, g/dLCell Count
Other T estsRed Blood Cells, >10,000/ µLWhite Blood Cells, per µL
Cirrhosis Straw-colored or 
bile-stained<25 (95%) >1.1 1% <250 (90%)a;
predominantly 
mesothelial
Neoplasm Straw-colored, 
hemorrhagic,
mucinous, or chylous>25 (75%) <1.1 20% >1000 (50%); 
variable cell typesCytology, cell 
block, perito-neal biopsy
Tuberculous
peritonitisClear, turbid, 
hemorrhagic,chylous>25 (50%) <1.1 7% >1000 (70%); 
usually >70% lymphocytesPeritoneal
biopsy, stain and culture for acid-fast bacilli
Pyogenic
peritonitisTurbid or puru-
lentIf purulent, >25 <1.1 Unusual Predominantly 
polymorpho-nuclearleukocytesPositive Gram’s 
stain, culture 
Congestive heart 
failureStraw-colored Variable, 
15–53>1.1 10% <1000 (90%); 
usuallymesothelial,mononuclear
Nephrosis Straw-colored or 
chylous<25 (100%) <1.1 Unusual <250; 
mesothelial,mononuclearIf chylous, ether 
extraction,Sudan staining
Pancreatic 
ascites 
(pancreatitis, pseudocyst)Turbid, hemor-
rhagic, or chy-lousVariable, often 
>25<1.1 Variable, may be 
blood-stainedVariable Increased 
amylase in ascitic ﬂuid and serum
aBecause the conditions of examining ﬂuid and selecting patients
were not identical in each series, the percentage ﬁgures (in paren-theses) should be taken as an indication of the order of magnitude
rather than as the precise incidence of any abnormal ﬁnding.
344 VIII. D ISORDERS OF THE  GASTROINTESTINAL  SYSTEM  — ANSWERS
VIII-89. The answer is B.   (Chap. 89)   Patients with a suspicious pancreatic lesion seen on imag-
ing that may be curable with local resection are often taken to surgery without further tis-
sue characterization. Transcutaneous biopsy carries with it the theoretical risk of seedingthe surrounding tissues as the needle is passed. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided ﬁne-nee-dle aspiration is increasing being utilized for biopsies as there is less risk of intraperito-neal spread of tumor. A negative biopsy or ﬁne-needle aspiration may not be sufﬁcient torule out a neoplasm when the lesion is small. The dismal prognosis for advanced diseasecalls for prompt surgical referral for potentially curable lesions. An elevated CA 19-9 levelis suggestive of pancreatic cancer but may also be elevated in cases of jaundice withoutpancreatic cancer. The reported sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the CA 19-9 assay for pan-creatic cancer is reported between 80 and 90%, but it should not be used to conﬁrm orexclude pancreatic cancer when the clinical scenario suggests the diagnosis.
345IX. RHEUMATOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to each question.
IX-1.   A 73-year-old woman with a medical history of obe-
sity and diabetes mellitus presents to your clinic com-
plaining of right knee pain that has been progressive andis worse with walking or standing. She has taken over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs with-out relief. She wants to know what is wrong with her kneeand what may have caused it. X-rays are performed andreveal cartilage loss and osteophyte formation. Which ofthe following represents the most potent risk factor forthe development of osteoarthritis?
A. Age
B. GenderC. Genetic susceptibilityD. ObesityE. Previous joint injury
IX-2.   A 42-year-old obese male presents to your ofﬁce with
complaints of paresthesias in the right hand that areworst in the fourth and ﬁfth ﬁngers. Symptoms have beenpresent intermittently for the last 4 months. He has noother past medical history and takes no medications. Theexamination is signiﬁcant for an intact neurologic exami-nation of the right upper extremity but mild wasting ofthe intrinsic muscles on inspection of the right hand.Laboratories show a normal white blood cell count, he-moglobin, and sedimentation rate. Electrolytes and cre-atinine and liver function tests are normal except for aserum glucose of 148 mg/dL. What is the most likely eti-ology of this patient’s symptoms?
A. Diabetes mellitus
B. Cholesterol emboliC. Churg-Strauss diseaseD. Cervical spondylosisE. Neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome
IX-3.   A 54-year-old man is admitted for persistent lower ab-
dominal and groin pain that began 7 months previously.Two months before his present admission, he required ex-ploratory laparoscopy for acute abdominal pain and pre-sumed cholecystitis. This revealed necrotic omental tissueand pericholecystitis necessitating omentectomy and chole-cystectomy. However, the pain continued unchanged. Hecurrently describes it as periumbilical and radiating into hisgroin and legs. It becomes worse with eating. The patient hasalso had episodic severe testicular pain, bowel urgency, nau-sea, vomiting, and diuresis. He has lost ~22.7 kg over thepreceding 6 months. His past medical history is signiﬁcantof hypertension that has recently become difﬁcult to control.
Medications on admission include aspirin, hydrochlo-
rothiazide, hydromorphone, lansoprazole, metoprolol,and quinapril. On physical examination, the patient ap-pears comfortable. His blood pressure is 170/100 mmHg,his heart rate is 88 beats/min, and he is afebrile. He hasnormal ﬁrst and second heart sounds without murmurs,and an S
4 is present. There are no carotid, renal, abdomi-
nal, or femoral bruits.
His lungs are clear to auscultation. Bowel sounds are nor-
mal. Abdominal palpation demonstrates minimal diffusetenderness without rebound or guarding. No masses arepresent, and the stool is negative for occult blood. Duringthe examination, the patient develops Raynaud's phenome-non in his right hand that persists for several minutes. Hisneurologic examination is intact. Admission laboratorystudies reveal an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 72 mm/h,a BUN of 17 mg/dL, and a creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL. The pa-tient has no proteinuria or hematuria. T ests for antinuclearantibodies, anti-double-stranded-DNA antibodies, and an-tineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are negative. Liverfunction tests are abnormal with an AST of 89 IU/L and anALT of 112 IU/L. Hepatitis B surface antigen and e antigenare positive. Mesenteric angiography demonstrates smallbeaded aneurysms of the superior and inferior mesentericveins. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Hepatocellular carcinoma
B. Ischemic colitisC. Microscopic polyangiitisD. Mixed cryoglobulinemiaE. Polyarteritis nodosaIX-3. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
346 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
IX-4.    A 64-year-old African-American male is evaluated in
the hospital for congestive heart failure, renal failure, and
polyneuropathy. Physical examination on admission wasnotable for these ﬁndings and raised waxy papules in theaxilla and inguinal region. Admission laboratories showeda BUN of 90 mg/dL and a creatinine of 6.3 mg/dL. T otalprotein was 9.0 g/dL, with an albumin of 3.2 g/dL. Hemat-ocrit was 24%, and white blood cell and platelet countswere normal. Urinalysis was remarkable for 3+ pro-teinuria but no cellular casts. Further evaluation includedan echocardiogram with a thickened left ventricle and pre-served systolic function. Which of the following tests ismost likely to diagnose the underlying condition?
A. Bone marrow biopsy
B. Electromyogram (EMG) with nerve conduction
studies
C. Fat pad biopsyD. Right heart catheterizationE. Renal ultrasound
IX-5.    A 31-year-old woman presents to your clinic com-
plaining of painful arthritis that is worse in the morningswhen she wakes up. She was recently evaluated by anophthalmologist for uveitis in her right eye. A recent lab-oratory report shows an erythrocyte sedimentation rateof 48 mm/h. Which of the following will be helpful in dis-tinguishing relapsing polychondritis from rheumatoidarthritis (RA)?
A. Arthritis associated with RA is nonerosive.
B. Eye inﬂammation is absent in relapsing polychondritis.C. Relapsing polychondritis will not present with vasculitis.D. Relapsing polychondritis will present with high-titer
rheumatoid factor.
E. The arthritis of relapsing polychondritis is asymmetric.
IX-6.    A 66-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid
arthritis and frequent pseudogout attacks in her left kneepresents with night sweats and a 2-day history of left kneepain. On physical examination, her temperature is 38.6°C,heart rate is 110 beats/min, blood pressure is 104/78mmHg, and oxygen saturation is 97% on room air. Herleft knee is swollen, red, painful, and warm. With 5° ofﬂexion or extension, she develops extreme pain. She hasevidence of chronic joint deformity in her hands, knees,and spine. Peripheral white blood cell (WBC) count is16,700 cells/µ L with 95% neutrophils. A diagnostic tap
of her left knee reveals 168,300 WBCs per microliter,99% neutrophils, and diffuse needle-shaped birefringentcrystals present. Gram stain shows rare gram-positivecocci in clusters. Management includes all of the follow-ingexcept
A. blood culturesB. glucocorticoidsC. needle aspiration of joint ﬂuidD. orthopedic surgery consultE. vancomycinIX-7.   A 58-year-old female presents complaining of right
shoulder pain. She does not recall any prior injury butnotes that she feels that the shoulder has been gettingprogressively more stiff over the last several months. Shepreviously had several episodes of bursitis of the rightshoulder that were treated successfully with NSAIDs andsteroid injections. The patient’s past medical history isalso signiﬁcant for diabetes mellitus, for which she takesmetformin and glyburide. On physical examination, theright shoulder is not warm or red but is tender to touch.Passive and active range of motion is limited in ﬂexion,extension, and abduction. A right shoulder radiogramshows osteopenia without evidence of joint erosion or os-teophytes. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Adhesive capsulitis
B. Avascular necrosisC. Bicipital tendinitisD. OsteoarthritisE. Rotator cuff tear
IX-8.   A 44-year-old woman presents for evaluation of dry
eyes and mouth. She ﬁrst noticed these symptoms >5years ago and the symptoms have worsened over time.She describes her eyes as gritty-feeling, as if there weresand in her eyes. Sometimes her eyes burn, and she statesthat it is difﬁcult to be outside in bright sunlight. In addi-tion, her mouth is quite dry. In her job, she is frequentlyasked to give business presentations and ﬁnds it increas-ingly difﬁcult to complete a 30- to 60-minute presenta-tion. She usually has water with her at all times. Althoughshe reports good dental hygiene without any recentchanges, her dentist has had to place ﬁllings twice in thepast 3 years for dental caries. Her only other past medicalhistory is treated tuberculosis that she contracted while inthe Peace Corp in Southeast Asia when in her twenties.She takes no medication regularly and does not smoke.Ocular examination reveals punctuate corneal ulcer-ations on Rose Bengal stain, and the Schirmer test shows<5 mm of wetness after 5 min. Her oral mucosa is drywith thick mucous secretions, and the parotid glands areenlarged bilaterally. Laboratory examination reveals posi-tive antibodies to Ro and La (SS-A and SS-B). In addi-tion, her chemistries reveal a sodium of 142 mEq/L,potassium 2.6 mEq/L, chloride 115 mEq/L, and bicar-bonate of 15 mEq/L. What is the most likely cause of thehypokalemia and acidemia in this patient?
A. Diarrhea
B. Distal (type I) renal tubular acidosisC. HypoaldosteronismD. Purging with underlying anorexia nervosaE. Renal compensation for chronic respiratory alkalosis
IX-9.   A patient with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis
presents to your ofﬁce with hand pain and you diagnosecarpal tunnel syndrome. A serum thyroid-stimulating hor-mone level is normal. Y ou also note bilateral knee effusions,
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 347
which the patient states have been there for many months.
Suspecting an amyloid deposition disease, you perform a fatpad biopsy. Which protein do you expect to ﬁnd on immu-nohistochemical staining?
A. β
2-Microglobulin
B. Fibrinogen α-chain
C. Immunoglobulin light chain
D. Serum amyloid AE. Transthyretin
IX-10.   A 41-year-old female presents to your clinic with 3
weeks of weakness, lethargy. and depressed mood. Shenotes increasing difﬁculty with climbing steps, rising froma chair, and combing her hair. She has no difﬁculty but-toning her blouse or writing. The patient also notes somedyspnea on exertion and orthopnea. She denies rash, jointaches, or constitutional symptoms. She is on no medica-tions, and the past medical history is otherwise uninfor-mative. The family history is notable only for coronaryartery disease. The physical examination is notable for anelevated jugular venous pressure, an S
3, and some bibasilar
crackles. The neurologic examination shows some markedproximal muscle weakness in the deltoids and biceps andthe hip ﬂexors. Distal muscle strength is normal. Sensoryexamination and reﬂexes are normal. Laboratories are un-remarkable except for a negative antinuclear antibodyscreen and a creatinine kinase of 3200 IU/L. Y ou suspect adiagnosis of polymyositis. All the following clinical condi-tions may occur in polymyositis except
A. an increased incidence of malignancyB. interstitial lung diseaseC. dilated cardiomyopathyD. dysphagiaE. Raynaud’s phenomenon
IX-11.   A 64-year-old man with congestive heart failure pre-
sents to the emergency room complaining of acute onset ofsevere pain in his right foot. The pain began during the nightand awoke him from a deep sleep. He reports the pain to beso severe that he could not wear a shoe or sock to the hospi-tal. His current medications are furosemide, 40 mg twicedaily, carvedilol, 6.25 mg twice daily, candesartan, 8 mg oncedaily, and aspirin, 325 mg once daily. On examination, he isfebrile to 38.5°C. The ﬁrst toe of the right foot is erythema-tous and exquisitely tender to touch. There is signiﬁcantswelling and effusion of the ﬁrst metatarsophalangeal jointon the right. No other joints are affected. Which of the fol-lowing ﬁndings would be expected on arthrocentesis?
A. Glucose level of <25 mg/dL
B. Positive Gram stainC. Presence of strongly negatively birefringent needle-
shaped crystals under polarized light microscopy
D. Presence of weakly positively birefringent rhomboi-
dal crystals under polarized light microscopy
E. White blood cell (WBC) count >100,000/ µLIX-12.    A 32-year-old African-American woman presents to her
primary care doctor complaining of fatigue, joint stiffnessand pain, mouth ulcers, and hair loss. She ﬁrst noticed fatigueabout 6 months ago, and at that time, a complete bloodcount and thyroid function tests were normal. Since then, shefeels like her symptoms are getting progressively worse. Shenow states that she sleeps ≥10 h but continues to feel fatigued.
She has also developed joint stiffness and pain in her hands,wrists, and knees that is present for about 1 h upon awaken-ing. For the past 1 month, she has had an area of hair loss onher scalp associated with a raised scaly rash. During this time,she intermittently developed painful mouth ulcerations thatwould spontaneously resolve. She also reports a severe “sun-burn” on her face, upper neck, and back that occurred after<1 h of sun exposure and which was unusual for her. Herpast medical history is positive for two spontaneous vaginaldeliveries that were uncomplicated. She has not had any priormiscarriages. She is taking oral contraceptive pills and has noallergies. On physical examination, the vital signs are: tem-perature 36.6°C, blood pressure 136/82 mmHg, heart rate 88beats/min, respiratory rate 12 breaths/min, Sa
O2 98% on
room air. She has a circular raised area on her right parietalarea that is 3 cm in diameter. This area has an atrophic centerwith hair loss and is erythematous with a hyperpigmentedrim. Her conjunctiva are pink and no scleral icterus ispresent. The oropharynx shows a single 2-mm aphthous ul-ceration on the buccal mucosa. Both wrists show some slighttenderness with palpation and pain with range of motion.The patient is incapable of closing her hands tightly. In addi-tion, there is warmth and a possible effusion in the right kneeand tenderness with range of motion in the left knee. Cardio-vascular, pulmonary, abdominal, and neurologic examina-tions are normal. Laboratory studies show the following:
The differential is 80% polymorphonuclear cells, 12% lym-
phocytes, 7% monocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 1% basophils.An antinuclear antibody (ANA) is positive at a titer of 1:640.Antibodies to double-stranded DNA are negative, and anti-Smith antibodies are positive at a titer of 1:160. The rheuma-toid factor level is 37 IU/L. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Behçet’s disease
B. Discoid lupus erythematosusC. Rheumatoid arthritisD. SarcoidosisE. Systemic lupus erythematosus
IX-13.    In this patient, which test should be performed next?
A. Chest radiographB. EchocardiogramC. ElectrocardiogramD. Skin biopsyE. UrinalysisWhite blood cell count 2300/ µL
Hemoglobin 8.9 g/dL
Hematocrit 26.7%Mean corpuscular volume 88 fLMean corpuscular hemoglobin count 32 g/dLPlatelet 98,000/mLIX-9. (Continued)
348 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
IX-14.    A 35-year-old female comes to the local health clinic
because for the last 6 months she has had recurrent urti-
carial lesions, which occasionally leave a residual discol-oration. She also has had arthralgias. The sedimentationrate now is 85 mm/h. The procedure most likely to yieldthe correct diagnosis in this case would be
A. a battery of wheal-and-ﬂare allergy skin tests
B. measurement of total serum IgE concentrationC. measurement of C1 esterase inhibitor activityD. skin biopsyE. patch testing
IX-15.    A 45-year-old obese man presents to the clinic sev-
eral weeks after starting a jogging regimen. He describesright-sided heel pain that has worsened over this time.The pain is worse in the morning and when the patient isbarefoot. On examination, pain can be elicited with pal-pation of the inferior medial right heel. Which of the fol-lowing is required to make a deﬁnitive diagnosis ofplantar fasciitis?
A. Compatible history and provocative testing
B. History and physical examination aloneC. History, physical examination, and nuclear medi-
cine bone scan
D. History, physical examination, and heel ultrasound
showing thickening of the fascia
E. History, physical examination, and plain radiograph
demonstrating heel spur
IX-16.    Which of the following ﬁndings on joint aspiration
is most likely to be associated with calcium pyrophos-phate deposition disease (pseudogout)?
A. Fluid, clear and viscous; white blood cell count, 400/
µL; crystals, rhomboidal and weakly positively bire-
fringent
B. Fluid, cloudy and watery; white blood cell count,
8000/µL; no crystals
C. Fluid, dark brown and viscous; white blood cell
count, 1200/ µL; crystals, needle-like and strongly
negatively birefringent
D. Fluid, cloudy and watery; white blood cell count,
12,000/µL; crystals, needle-like and strongly nega-tively birefringent
E. Fluid, cloudy and watery; white blood cell count,
4800/µL; crystals, rhomboidal and weakly positivelybirefringent
IX-17.   A 45-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room for evaluation of fatigue, fever, and acute onset ofjoint pain and swelling of the right knee, left ankle, andright second toe. She reports that she was ill with a diar-rheal illness about 2 weeks ago. She did not seek evalua-tion as the symptoms resolved spontaneously over 48 h.She did lose about 2.3 kg, which she has been unable to re-gain. Three days ago, she developed a feeling of malaisewith fevers and pain in her right second toe. Additionaljoints have become inﬂamed over the ensuing 72 h. Shedenies any prior similar episodes. She is not currently sex-ually active and estimates her last sexual activity to be 8months prior to presentation. She has a history of seasonalrhinitis, but is taking no medications currently. On exami-nation, she is febrile at 38.4°C. Her left eye has evidence ofconjunctival injection. There is a superﬁcial ulcer on theinside of her lower lip that is not painful. The right knee iswarm to touch with an effusion. Passive movement resultsin pain. The left ankle is similarly warm and painful. Theright second great toe has the appearance of a “sausagedigit.” There is also pain with palpation at the tendinousinsertion of both Achilles tendons. There are no genitalulcers or discharge. No rash is present. Arthrocentesis isperformed and is consistent with inﬂammatory arthritiswithout crystals or organisms seen on Gram stain. Cervi-cal probes for Neisseria gonorrhoeae  and Chlamydia
trachomatis are negative. Reactive arthritis followingCampylobacter infection is suspected with positive serum
antibodies to C. jejuni . Which of the following statements
is true regarding this diagnosis?
A. Chronic joint symptoms affect 15% of individuals,
and recurrences of the acute syndrome may occur.
B. Presence of HLA-B27 antigen predicts individuals
who are likely to have a better prognosis.
C. Reactive arthritis is self-limited and should be ex-
pected to resolve spontaneously over the next 2 weeks.
D. The causative organism has no effect on long-term out-
comes following an initial episode of reactive arthritis.
IX-18.   A 54-year-old female with rheumatoid arthritis is
treated with inﬂiximab for refractory disease. All the fol-
lowing are potential side effects of this treatment except
A. demyelinating disorders
B. disseminated tuberculosisC. exacerbation of congestive heart failureD. pancytopeniaE. pulmonary ﬁbrosis
IX-19.   A 26-year-old man presents with severe bilateral
pain in his hands, ankles, knees, and elbows. He is recov-ering from a sore throat and has had recent fevers to38.9°C. Social history is notable for recent unprotectedreceptive oral intercourse with a man ~1 week ago. Physi-cal examination reveals a well-developed man in moderatediscomfort. He is afebrile. His pharynx is erythematouswith pustular exudates on his tonsils. He has tender ante-rior cervical lymphadeno pathy. His cardiac examination
is notable for a normal S
1 and S 2 and a soft ejection mur-
mur. His lungs are clear. Abdomen is benign with no or-ganomegaly. He has no rash, and genital examination isnormal. His bilateral proximal interphalangeal joints,metacarpophalangeal joints, wrists, ankles, and metatar-sophalangeal joints are red, warm, and boggy with ten-derness noted with both passive and active movement. AIX-17. (Continued)
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 349
complete metabolic panel and complete blood count are
all within normal limits. His erythrocyte sedimentationrate is 85 mm/h and C-reactive protein is 11 mg/dL. Whatis the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute HIV infection
B. Acute rheumatic feverC. Lyme diseaseD. Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection
E. Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis
IX-20.   A 27-year-old female with SLE is in remission; cur-
rent treatment consists of azathioprine 75 mg/d andprednisone 5 mg/d. Last year she had a life-threateningexacerbation of her disease. She now strongly desires tobecome pregnant. Which of the following is the least ap-propriate action to take?
A. Advise her that the risk of spontaneous abortion is
high.
B. Warn her that exacerbations can occur in the ﬁrst
trimester and in the postpartum period.
C. T ell her it is unlikely that a newborn will have lupus.
D. Advise her that fetal loss rates are higher if anticardio-
lipin antibodies are detected in her serum.
E. Stop the prednisone just before she attempts to be-
come pregnant.
IX-21.   A 48-year-old male has a long-standing history of
ankylosing spondylitis. His most recent spinal ﬁlm showsstraightening of the lumbar spine, loss of lordosis, and“squaring” of the vertebral bodies. He currently is limitedby pain with ambulation that is not improved with non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory medications. Which of thefollowing treatments has been shown to improve symp-toms the best at this stage of the illness?
A. Celecoxib
B. EtanerceptC. PrednisoneD. SulfasalazineE. Thalidomide
IX-22.   A 72-year-old woman presents to the emergency
room for an episode of vision loss in her right eye. The vi-sion loss came on abruptly and is described as a curtainfalling across her visual ﬁeld. She immediately called herdaughter and upon arrival to the emergency room 40 minlater, her vision had returned to normal. Recently she alsohas been experiencing dull throbbing headaches for whichshe is taking acetaminophen, with limited relief. She has apast medical history of hypercholesterolemia and coro-nary artery disease, undergoing angioplasty and stentingof the right coronary artery 8 years previously. She doesnot smoke currently but has a 40-pack-year history of to-bacco, quitting only after her diagnosis of coronary arterydisease. On review of systems, the patient recalls pain inher scalp with combing her hair, particularly on the rightside, and occasional pain with chewing food. She has alsorecently noticed stiffness and pain in her hips, making itdifﬁcult to stand from seated position. On examination,she has 20/30 visual acuity in the left eye, and 20/100 vi-sual acuity in the right eye. Funduscopic examination sug-gests anterior ischemic optic neuropathy. There are nocarotid bruits present, but palpation of the temporal ar-tery is painful. The neurologic examination is otherwisenormal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is 102mm/h. The hemoglobin is 7.9 g/dL, and hematocrit is25.5%. A head CT shows no acute ischemic event. Whichof the following is the next most important step in themanagement of this patient?
A. Initiate treatment with indomethacin, 75 mg twice
daily.
B. Initiate treatment with prednisone, 60 mg daily.
C. Initiate treatment with unfractionated heparin ad-
justed based on activated partial thromboplastintime to obtain full anticoagulation.
D. Perform magnetic resonance angiography of the brain.E. Perform a temporal artery biopsy.
IX-23.    A patient presents with 3 weeks of pain in the lower
back. All the following are risk factors for serious causesof spine pathology except
A. age more than 50 yearsB. urinary incontinenceC. duration of pain more than 2 weeksD. bed rest without reliefE. history of intravenous drug use
IX-24.    A 64-year-old man with coronary artery disease and
atrial ﬁbrillation is referred for evaluation of fevers, ar-thralgias, pleuritis, and malar rash. The symptoms havedeveloped over the past 6 months. The pleuritis has re-sponded to steroid therapy, but prednisone has been un-able to be tapered off due to recurrence of symptoms atdaily steroid doses <15 mg of prednisone. His medica-tions include aspirin, procainamide, lovastatin, predni-sone, and carvedilol. Y ou suspect drug-induced lupus dueto procainamide. Antibodies directed against which ofthe following proteins is most likely to be positive?
A. Cardiolipin
B. Double-strand DNAC. HistoneD. Ribonucleoprotein (RNP)E. Ribosomal P
IX-25.    A 28-year-old woman seeks evaluation from her pri-
mary care doctor for recurrent episodes of hives andstates that she is “allergic to cold weather.” She reportsthat for >10 years she would develop areas of hives whenexposed to cold temperatures, usually on her arms andlegs. She has never sought evaluation previously andstates that over the past several years the occurrence of theIX-22. (Continued) IX-19. (Continued)
350 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
hives has become more frequent. Other than cold expo-
sure, she can identify no other triggers for developmentof hives. She has no history of asthma or atopy. She deniesfood intolerance. Her only medication is oral contracep-tive pills, which she has taken for 5 years. She lives in asingle-family home that was built 2 years ago. On exami-nation, she develops a linear wheal after being strokedalong her forearm with a tongue depressor. Upon placingher hand in cold water, her hand becomes red and swol-len. In addition, there are several areas with a wheal andﬂare reaction on the arm above the area of cold exposure.What is the next step in the management of this patient?
A. Assess for the presence of antithyroglobulin and an-
timicrosomal antibodies.
B. Check C1 inhibitor levels.
C. Discontinue the oral contraceptive pills.D. Treat with cetirizine, 10 mg daily.E. Treat with cyproheptadine, 8 mg daily.
IX-26.    A 34-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for eval-
uation and treatment of renal failure and an abnormal CTof the chest. For the past 2 months, he has had fatigue, mal-aise, and intermittent fevers to as high as 38.2°C. About 3weeks ago, he sought treatment from his primary providerfor sinus pain and congestion with a purulent and bloodynasal discharge. He was treated for 2 weeks with ampicillin-sulbactam, but his symptoms have only minimally im-proved. When he returned to his physician, a basic meta-bolic panel was performed which showed a creatinine of 2.8mg/dL. A urinalysis showed 1+ protein with 25 red bloodcells per high-power ﬁeld. Red blood cell casts were present.His chest CT is shown below. Which of the following testswould be most likely to be positive in this individual?
A. Antiglomerular basement membrane antibodies
B. Antiproteinase-3 antibodiesC. High titers of antibodies to antistreptolysin OD. Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodiesE. Positive blood cultures for Staphylococcus aureusIX-27.   An 18-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with
acute onset of crushing substernal chest pain that beganabruptly 30 min ago. He reports the pain radiating to hisneck and right arm. He has otherwise been in goodhealth. He currently plays trumpet in his high schoolmarching band but does not participate regularly in aero-bic activities. On physical examination, he is diaphoreticand tachypneic. His blood pressure is 100/48 mmHg andheart rate is 110 beats/min. His cardiovascular examina-tion has a regular rhythm but is tachycardic. A II/VI holo-systolic murmur is heard best at the apex and radiates tothe axilla. His lungs have bilateral rales at the bases. Theelectrocardiogram demonstrates 4 mm of ST elevation inthe anterior leads. On further questioning regarding hispast medical history, he recalls having been told that hewas hospitalized for some problem with his heart whenhe was 2 years old. His mother, who accompanies him,reports that he received aspirin and γ globulin as treat-
ment. Since that time, he has required intermittent fol-low-up with echocardiography. What is the most likelycause of this patient’s acute coronary syndrome?
A. Dissection of the aortic root and left coronary ostia
B. Presence of a myocardial bridge overlying the left
anterior descending artery
C. Stenosis of a coronary artery aneurysmD. Vasospasm following cocaine ingestionE. Vasculitis involving the left anterior descending artery
IX-28.   A 29-year-old male with episodic abdominal pain
and stress-induced edema of the lips, the tongue, and oc-casionally the larynx is likely to have low functional orabsolute levels of which of the following proteins?
A. C5A (complement cascade)
B. IgEC. T cell receptor, α chain
D. CyclooxygenaseE. C1 esterase inhibitor
IX-29.   Which of the following joints are typically spared in
osteoarthritis (OA)?
A. Ankle 
B. Cervical spineC. Distal interphalangeal jointD. HipE. Knee
IX-30.   A 62-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with
pneumococcal bacteremia. Her past medical history is no-table for a history of pneumonia due to Haemophilus inﬂu-
enzae  type B2 years ago and hypertension. On review of
systems, she reports easy bruising, peripheral paresthesias,and symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome. On physical ex-amination, she has ecchymoses on her face and arms. Hernails are dystrophic and she has alopecia. Her tongue hasindentations on both sides. Abdominal examination showsonly hepatomegaly. She takes no medications or supple-
FIGURE IX-26
IX-25. (Continued)
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 351
ments and has no signiﬁcant family history. A complete
blood count shows a white blood cell count of 17,000/ µL,
hematocrit of 30%, and platelets of 300,000/ µL. Differen-
tial shows 75% neutrophils, 20% lymphocytes. Serum al-bumin is 3.3 mg/dL, calcium 8.0 mg/dL total protein 8.2mg/dL, AST 32 U/L, ALT 32 U/L, total bilirubin 1.3 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 120 U/L. What is the most likelyetiology of the patient’s current infection?
A. Cyclical neutropenia
B. Functional asplenismC. HIV infectionD. Sickle cell anemiaE. X-linked agammaglobulinemia
IX-31.   Which of the following statements regarding rheu-
matoid arthritis is true?
A. There is an association with the class II major histo-
compatibility complex allele HLA-B27.
B. The earliest lesion in rheumatoid arthritis is an in-
crease in the number of synovial lining cells with
microvascular injury.
C. Females are affected three times more often than are
males, and this difference is maintained throughoutlife.
D. Africans and African Americans most commonly
have the class II major histocompatibility complexallele HLA-DR4 .
E. Titers of rheumatoid factor are not predictive of the
severity of rheumatoid arthritis or its extraarticularmanifestations.
IX-32.   Which of the following deﬁnitions best ﬁts the term
enthesitis ?
A. Alteration of joint alignment so that articulating
surfaces incompletely approximate each other
B. Inﬂammation at the site of tendinous or ligamen-
tous insertion into bone
C. Inﬂammation of the periarticular membrane lining
the joint capsule
D. Inﬂammation of a saclike cavity near a joint that de-
creases friction
E. A palpable vibratory or crackling sensation elicited
with joint motion
IX-33.   A 35-year-old female presents to her primary care
doctor complaining of diffuse body and joint pain. Whenasked to describe which of her joints are most affected,she answers, “All of them.” There is no associated stiff-ness, redness, or swelling of the joints. No Raynaud’s phe-nomenon has been appreciated. Occasionally she notesnumbness in the ﬁngers and toes. The patient complainsof chronic pain and poor sleep quality that she feels is dueto her pain. She previously was seen in the clinic forchronic headaches that were felt to be tension-related.She has tried taking over-the-counter ibuprofen twicedaily without relief of pain. She has no other medicalproblems. On physical examination, the patient appearscomfortable. Her joints exhibit full range of motion with-out evidence of inﬂammatory arthritis. She does havepain with palpation at bilateral suboccipital muscle inser-tions, at C5, at the lateral epicondyle, in the upper outerquadrant of the buttock, at the medial fat pad of the kneeproximal to the joint line, and unilaterally on the secondright rib. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is 12 s. An-tinuclear antibodies are positive at a titer of 1:40 in aspeckled pattern. The patient is HLA-B27-positive. Rheu-matoid factor is negative. Radiograms of the cervicalspine, hips, and elbows are normal. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. Disseminated gonococcal infectionC. FibromyalgiaD. Rheumatoid arthritisE. Systemic lupus erythematosus
IX-34.    A 42-year-old woman comes to your clinic 1 week
after her primary doctor diagnosed her with ﬁbromyal-gia. She describes years of fatigue, chronic pain, poorsleep, and irritability and is unable to work due to hersymptoms. A review of her physical examination con-ﬁrms the presence of pain on digital palpation at 14 of 18characteristic sites. While relieved at ﬁnally having a diag-nosis, she is concerned about what treatments are avail-able. Which of the following should be your ﬁrsttreatment step?
A. Improve sleep and consider tricyclics 
B. Initiation of a pain diary and frequent, brief clinic
visits 
C. Low-dose narcotics and a long-acting benzodiazepine D. Referral for psychotherapy with a psychologistE. Treatment of depression with a selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
IX-35.    An 18-year-old man with ankylosing spondylitis
(AS) is concerned about the development of disabilitydue to his disease. Which of the following statements istrue regarding the development and treatment of disabil-ity in AS?
A. Anti-TNF- α (tumor necrosis factor α) inhibitors are
now ﬁrst-line therapy and have been shown to limit
disability while being safe for long-term therapy.
B. Despite the development of ankylosis of the spine,
spinal fracture is a rare complication, affecting<10% of individuals with AS.
C. Maintenance of an exercise program to maintain
posture and range of motion is important in limit-ing disability.
D. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
decrease pain but have no effect on the developmentof disability in AS.IX-33. (Continued) IX-30. (Continued)
352 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
IX-36.    A 23-year-old woman was diagnosed with systemic
lupus erythematosus based upon the presence of polyar-
thritis, malar rash with photosensitivity, and oral ulcer-ations. Antibodies to double-stranded DNA, Smithprotein, and antinuclear antibodies were present in hightiters. A urinalysis is normal. The patient is requestingtreatment for the joint symptoms as she feels they limither activities of daily living. What is the best choice forinitial therapy in this individual?
A. Hydroxychloroquine, 200–400 mg daily
B. Methotrexate, 15 mg weeklyC. Physical therapy onlyD. Prednisone, 1 mg/kg dailyE. Quinacrine, 100 mg three times daily
IX-37.    A 43-year-old male presents to your ofﬁce com-
plaining of weakness in the right hand for 2 days. He re-ports that he had been in excellent health until 2 monthsago, when he was diagnosed with hypertension. Sincethat diagnosis, he has lost 20 lb unintentionally and com-plains of frequent headaches and abdominal pain that isworse after eating. He previously was an injection druguser but now is maintained on methadone. His onlymedications are hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg/d, metha-done 70 mg/d, and lisinopril 5 mg/d. On physical exami-nation, the patient appears well developed and withoutdistress. Blood pressure is 148/94. He is not tachycardic.The examination is otherwise notable only for the inabil-ity to extend the right wrist and ﬁngers against gravity.Laboratory studies show an erythrocyte sedimentationrate (ESR) of 88 mm/h, an aspartate aminotransferase(AST) of 154 IU/L, and an alanine aminotransferase(ALT) of 176 IU/L. Which of the following tests is mostuseful in establishing a diagnosis?
A. Hepatitis B surface antigen
B. Hepatitis C viral loadC. Anticytoplasmic neutrophil antibodiesD. Mesenteric angiographyE. Radial nerve biopsy
IX-38.    A 23-year-old woman seeks evaluation for seasonal
rhinitis. She reports that she develops symptoms yearly inthe spring and fall. During this time, she develops rhinitiswith postnasal drip and cough that disrupts her sleep. Inaddition, she will also note itchy and watery eyes. Whenthe symptoms occur, she takes nonprescription lorata-dine, 10 mg daily, with signiﬁcant improvement in hersymptoms. What is the most likely allergen(s) that arecausing this patient’s symptoms?
A. Grass
B. RagweedC. TreesD. A and BE. B and CF. All of the aboveIX-39.   A 45-year-old male has been hospitalized for several
weeks in the intensive care unit for postsurgical compli-cations after gastrojejunal bypass surgery. He is noted tohave persistent fevers and on examination is found tohave erythema, ﬂuctuance, and tenderness over the pos-terior surface of the left elbow. Initial management of thisdisorder should include all the following except
A. incision and drainageB. empirical antibiotics for gram-positive organismsC. aspiration of the collection for Gram stain and cultureD. microscopic evaluation of aspirate for crystalsE. pressure-relieving devices
IX-40.   A 51-year-old male presents to your ofﬁce com-
plaining of lower back pain. When he exerts himself orlifts items, he describes worsening of the pain and alsopain in the left buttock that radiates down the posteriorleft thigh. The patient denies pain at rest and any his-tory of trauma. Y ou examine his lower back. Which ex-amination maneuver is the most speciﬁc for lumbardisk herniation?
A. Right straight leg raise
B. Left straight leg raiseC. Right crossed straight leg raiseD. Left crossed straight leg raiseE. Reverse straight leg raise
IX-41.   A 42-year-old woman is being treated with cyclo-
phosphamide, 2 mg/kg daily, for Wegener’s granulomato-sis manifested as glomerulonephritis, tracheal stenosis,and cavitary lung disease. All of the following are poten-tial side effects of cyclophosphamide at this dose except
A. alopeciaB. bone marrow suppressionC. hemorrhagic cystitisD. infertilityE. myelodysplasia
IX-42.   Which of the following statements best describes the
function of proteins encoded by the human major histo-compatibility complex (MHC) I and II genes?
A. Activation of the complement system
B. Binding to cell surface receptors on granulocytes
and macrophages to initiate phagocytosis
C. Nonspeciﬁc binding of antigen for presentation to T
cells
D. Speciﬁc antigen binding in response to B cell activa-
tion to promote neutralization and precipitation
IX-43.   A 32-year-old pregnant woman presents to clinic
with right thumb and wrist pain that has worsened overseveral weeks. She has pain when she pinches her thumbagainst her other ﬁngers. On physical examination shehas mild swelling and tenderness over the radial styloidprocess, and pain is elicited when she places her thumb in
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 353
her palm and grasps it with her ﬁngers. A Phalen maneu-
ver is negative. Which condition is most likely?
A. Carpal tunnel syndrome
B. DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis C. Gouty arthritis of the ﬁrst metacarpophalangeal
joint
D. Palmar fasciitisE. Rheumatoid arthritis
IX-44.   A 63-year-old white female is admitted to the hospi-
tal complaining of hemoptysis and shortness of breath.She had been well until 3 months ago, when she notedvague symptoms of fatigue and a 10-lb unintentionalweight loss. Past medical history is notable only for osteo-porosis. Her current symptoms began on the day of pre-sentation with the expectoration of >200 mL of red bloodin the emergency department. On physical examination,the patient is in marked respiratory distress with a respi-ratory rate of 44 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation is78% on room air and 88% on nonrebreather mask. Pulseis 120 beats/min, with a blood pressure of 170/110. Thereare diffuse crackles throughout both lung ﬁelds, and thecardiac examination is signiﬁcant only for a regulartachycardia. There are no rashes or joint swellings. Labo-ratory studies reveal a hemoglobin of 10.2 mg/dL with amean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 88 µm
3 (fL). The
white blood cell count is 9760/mm3. Blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) is 78 mg/dL, and creatinine is 3.2 mg/dL. The uri-nalysis shows 1+ proteinuria, moderate hemoglobin, 25to 35 red blood cells (RBC) per high-power ﬁeld, and oc-casional RBC casts. Chest computed tomography (CT)shows diffuse alveolar inﬁltrates consistent with alveolarhemorrhage. The antimyeloperoxidase titer is positive at126 U/mL (normal <1.4 U/mL). What is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Goodpasture’s disease
B. Wegener’s granulomatosisC. Microscopic polyangiitisD. Polyarteritis nodosaE. Cryoglobulinemia
IX-45.   A 62-year-old white male presents with a chief com-
plaint of right knee pain and swelling. Past medical historyis signiﬁcant for obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of34 kg/m
2, diet-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, and hy-
pertension. His medications include hydrochlorothiazideand acetaminophen as needed for pain. Physical examina-tion is remarkable for a moderate-size effusion of the rightknee, with range of motion limited to 90° of ﬂexion and160° of extension. There is minimal warmth and no red-ness. He has crepitus with range of motion. With weightbearing, he has outward bowing of the legs bilaterally. Aradiogram of the right knee shows osteophytes and jointspace narrowing. Which of the following is the most likelyﬁnding on joint ﬂuid examination?A. A Gram stain showing gram-positive cocci in clus-
ters
B. A white blood cell count of 1110/mm
3
C. A white blood cell count of 22,000/mm3
D. Positively birefringent crystals on polarizing light
microscopy
E. Negatively birefringent crystals on polarizing light
microscopy
IX-46.    A 25-year-old female presents with a complaint of
painful mouth ulcerations. She describes these lesions asshallow ulcers that last for 1 or 2 weeks. The ulcers havebeen appearing for the last 6 months. For the last 2 days,the patient has had a painful red eye. She has had no gen-ital ulcerations, arthritis, skin rashes, or photosensitivity.On physical examination, the patient appears well devel-oped and in no distress. She has a temperature of 37.6°C(99.7°F), heart rate of 86, blood pressure of 126/72, andrespiratory rate of 16. Examination of the oral mucosa re-veals two shallow ulcers with a yellow base on the buccalmucosa. The ophthalmologic examination is consistentwith anterior uveitis. The cardiopulmonary examinationis normal. She has no arthritis, but medially on the rightthigh there is a palpable cord in the saphenous vein. Lab-oratory studies reveal an erythrocyte sedimentation rateof 68 s. White blood cell count is 10,230/mm
3 with a dif-
ferential of 68% polymorphonuclear cells, 28% lympho-cytes, and 4% monocytes. The antinuclear antibody andanti-dsDNA antibody are negative. C3 is 89 mg/dL, andC4 is 24 mg/dL. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Behçet’s syndrome
B. Systemic lupus erythematosusC. Discoid lupus erythematosusD. Sjögren’s syndromeE. Cicatricial pemphigoid
IX-47.    What is the best initial treatment for this patient?
A. T opical glucocorticoids including ophthalmic pred-
nisolone
B. Systemic glucocorticoids and azathioprineC. ThalidomideD. ColchicineE. Intralesional interferon α
IX-48.    A 42-year-old man presents to your clinic complain-
ing of left shoulder soreness that has been bothering himfor 8 months. He experiences intermittent pain that isworse at night. Active abduction of his left arm over hishead causes extreme pain. He describes his pain as a dullache in his shoulder. He cannot identify a speciﬁc traumathat led to his pain but notes that he lifts weights andplays sports on a regular basis. On physical examination,he has tenderness over the lateral aspect of the humeralhead and pain with arm abduction. Which of the follow-ing is the most likely cause of his symptoms?IX-45. (Continued) IX-43. (Continued)
354 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
A. Acromioclavicular arthritis
B. Bicipital tendonitisC. Inﬂammation of the infraspinatus tendonD. Inﬂammation of the supraspinatus tendonE. Subluxation of the left humeral head
IX-49.    A 42-year-old male presents with complaints of a
rash and joint pain. He ﬁrst noticed the rash 6 monthsago. It is primarily on the hands (see Figure IX-49, ColorAtlas), the extensor surfaces of the elbows, and the knees,low back, and scalp. Although he complains of the ap-pearance of these lesions, they do not itch or hurt. The pa-tient has not been previously evaluated for them and hasrecently noticed changes in the nail beds. For the last 2weeks, the patient has had increasingly severe pain in thedistal joints of the hands and feet. His hands are so painfulthat he is having trouble writing and holding utensils. Thepatient denies fevers, weight loss, fatigue, cough, short-ness of breath, or changes in bowel or bladder habits.Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Arthritis associated with inﬂammatory bowel disease
B. GoutC. OsteoarthritisD. Psoriatic arthritisE. Rheumatoid arthritis
IX-50.    Which of the following is the most common clinical
manifestation of relapsing polychondritis?
A. Aortic regurgitation
B. Arthritis of weight-bearing jointsC. Auricular chondritisD. Reduced hearingE. Saddle-nose deformity
IX-51.    A 60-year-old woman with a history of Sjögren’s
syndrome diagnosed 20 years ago presents to her primarycare doctor complaining of facial swelling. Her xerosto-mia dry eye symptoms have not changed. She is known tobe positive for rheumatoid factor in addition to Ro andLa antibodies but is not thought to have rheumatoid ar-thritis. She previously had cutaneous vasculitis requiringtreatment with prednisone, but she has been off steroidsfor 5 years without evidence of recurrence. She is cur-rently using artiﬁcial tears and cevimeline, 30 mg threetimes daily. On physical examination, her right parotidgland is enlarged. It is not tender, but is ﬁrm and hard totouch. It is noted that the right parotid gland was simi-larly enlarged on a visit 3 months ago. She denies sys-temic illness or any new symptoms. What is the mostlikely diagnosis?
A. Adenoid cystic carcinoma
B. B cell lymphomaC. Impacted sialolithD. MumpsE. Recurrent vasculitisIX-52.   A 42-year-old Turkish man presents to his physician
complaining of recurring ulcers in the mouth and on hispenis. He states that the ulcers are painful and last forabout 2 weeks before spontaneously resolving. In addi-tion, he intermittently gets skin lesions that he describesas painful nodules on his lower extremities. Y ou suspectthat he has Behçet’s syndrome. A pathergy test is per-formed. What response would you expect after injecting0.3 mL of sterile saline under the skin?
A. Development of 10 mm of induration with overly-
ing erythema after 72 h
B. Development of a 2- to 3-mm papule at the site of
insertion in 2–3 days
C. Development of granulomatous inﬂammation 4–6
weeks after the injection
D. Development of an urticarial reaction within 15 min
E. No reaction
IX-53.   A 45-year-old African-American woman with sys-
temic lupus erythematosus (SLE) presents to the emer-gency room with complaints of headache and fatigue.Her prior manifestations of SLE have been arthralgias,hemolytic anemia, malar rash, and mouth ulcers, and sheis known to have high titers of antibodies to double-stranded DNA. She currently is taking prednisone, 5 mgdaily, and hydroxychloroquine, 200 mg daily. On presen-tation, she is found to have a blood pressure of 190/110mmHg with a heart rate of 98 beats/min. A urinalysisshows 25 red blood cells (RBCs) per high-power ﬁeldwith 2+ proteinuria. No RBC casts are identiﬁed. Herblood urea nitrogen is 88 mg/dL, and creatinine is 2.6mg/dL (baseline 0.8 mg/dL). She has not previously hadrenal disease related to SLE and is not taking nonsteroidalanti-inﬂammatory drugs. She denies any recent illness,decreased oral intake, or diarrhea. What is the most ap-propriate next step in the management of this patient?
A. Initiate cyclophosphamide, 500 mg/m
2 body surface
area IV , and plan to repeat monthly for 3–6 months.
B. Initiate hemodialysis.
C. Initiate high-dose steroid therapy (IV methylpredniso-
lone, 1000 mg daily for 3 doses, followed by oral pred-nisone, 1 mg/kg daily) and mycophenolate mofetil, 2 gdaily.
D. Initiate plasmapheresis.E. Withhold all therapy until renal biopsy is performed.
IX-54.   Which of the following statements regarding rheu-
matoid arthritis (RA) is true?
A. 75% of patients with RA have a ﬁrst-degree relative
with the disease.
B. Genetic factors explain 90% of disease susceptibility
in RA.
C. Greater than 75% of patients are diagnosed in their
twenties to thirties.
D. Inﬂammatory synovitis is the hallmark of RA.
E. The male to female ratio is 3:1.IX-48. (Continued)
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 355
IX-55.   A 52-year-old female has poorly controlled rheuma-
toid arthritis on prednisone 5 mg daily and etanercept 50
mg weekly by subcutaneous injection. Despite this, she hasongoing symptoms with severe pain in the wrists, hands,feet, and ankles. She also has destructive arthritis causingswan-neck and boutonnière deformities in the hands as wellas plantar subluxation of the metatarsal heads that preventsambulation. She has subcutaneous nodules on the extensorsurfaces of the arms. She presents to the emergency roomcomplaining of fevers and dysuria. On physical examinationtemperature is 39.1°C (102.3°F). Heart rate is 112, andblood pressure is 122/76. The examination is unremarkableexcept for right costovertebral angle tenderness and spleno-megaly. Laboratory studies at the time of presentation reveala white blood cell count of 2300/mm
3 with 15% polymor-
phonuclear cells, 75% lymphocytes, 8% monocytes, and 2%eosinophils. She is also anemic with a hemoglobin of 9.2mg/dL and a hematocrit of 28.7%. The mean corpuscularvolume is 88 fL. The platelet count is 132,000/mm
3. A pe-
ripheral blood smear shows normocytic anemia withoutanisocytosis or poikilocytosis. She is found to have Esche-
richia coli bacteremia related to a urinary tract infection. She
is treated with ceftriaxone and does well. However, she re-mains anemic and neutropenic. The patient undergoes abone marrow biopsy that shows hypercellularity with a lackof mature neutrophils. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Acute myelogenous leukemia
B. B cell lymphomaC. Disseminated Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
D. Felty’s syndromeE. Idiosyncratic reaction to etanercept
IX-56.    What is the most common extraarticular manifesta-
tion of ankylosing spondylitis?
A. Anterior uveitis
B. Aortic regurgitationC. CataractsD. Inﬂammatory bowel diseaseE. Third-degree heart block
IX-57.    A 42-year-old female presents to the physician with
3 months of worsening dyspnea on exertion, malaise, andweakness. She reports that the symptoms have worsenedgradually and are associated with low-grade fever, an-orexia, and an 8-lb weight loss. She has trouble climbingstairs because of leg weakness and shortness of breath.Recently she has noticed that her arms tire while she isbrushing her teeth or combing her hair. Her mother alsocommented that the patient seems to have difﬁculty ris-ing from the couch. Her writing is normal, and she has nosensory symptoms. Physical examination is notable for atemperature of 37.8°C (100°F), bilateral lung crackles,and diminished strength in the deltoids, quadriceps, andpsoas muscles. Laboratory studies are notable for an ele-vated creatine kinase. Chest radiography shows bilateralinterstitial inﬁltrates, and lung volumes are reduced to70% of the predicted values. Which of the following auto-antibodies is most likely to be present in this patient?
A. Antiglomerular basement membrane antibody
B. Antihistone antibodyC. Anti-Jo-1 antibodyD. Antimicrosomal antibodyE. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
IX-58.    A 43-year-old man presents to your clinic complain-
ing of bilateral knee pain. He states that the pain worsenswith walking and is not present at rest. He has been expe-riencing knee pain for many months and has had no relieffrom over-the-counter analgesics. He has a history of hy-pertension and obesity. Which of the following representsthe best initial treatment strategy for this patient?
A. Avoidance of walking for several weeks
B. Light daily walking exercisesC. Low-dose, long-acting narcoticsD. Oral steroid pulseE. Weight loss
IX-59.   A 53-year-old woman presents to your clinic complain-
ing of fatigue and generalized pain that have worsened over 2years. She also describes irritability and poor sleep and is con-cerned that she is depressed. She reveals that she was recentlyseparated from her husband and has been stressed at work.Which of the following elements of her presentation meetAmerican College of Rheumatology criteria for ﬁbromyalgia?
A. Diffuse chronic pain and abnormal sleep 
B. Diffuse pain without other etiology and evidence of
major depression
C. Major depression, life stressor, chronic pain, and fe-
male gender
D. Major depression and pain on palpation at 6 of 18
tender point sites
E. Widespread chronic pain and pain on palpation at
11 of 18 tender point sites
IX-60.    A 62-year-old female complains of aching joints.
She notes intermittent stiffness and pain in the knees,hips, wrists, and hands. She also describes easy fatigabil-ity, dyspepsia, a dry cough, and itchy red eyes and also hastrouble keeping her dentures in place. There is a historyof diabetes but no other signiﬁcant history. Medicationsinclude insulin and naproxen. She has no HIV risk fac-tors. Examination is signiﬁcant for dry mucous mem-branes in the oropharynx. There is no evidence of jointdestruction or active inﬂammation. Laboratory studiesshow a negative antinucleolar antibody but a positive Ro/SSA autoantigen. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Sarcoidosis
B. Sjögren’s syndromeC. Rheumatoid arthritisD. Psychogenic illnessE. Vitamin A deﬁciencyIX-57. (Continued)
356 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
IX-61.   A 46-year-old woman is referred to your clinic by her
primary care physician. She describes fatigue and diffuse
muscle aches that have been worsening over a period of 6months. She also has not been sleeping well. Her primarydoctor evaluated her and sent screening laboratory tests,which returned with a positive rheumatoid factor. She hasread about rheumatoid arthritis on the Internet and isvery concerned that she has the disease based on hersymptoms and her positive test. Which of the following istrue in regard to diagnosing rheumatoid arthritis (RA)?
A. 10% of healthy individuals will test positive for anti-
bodies to cyclic citrullinated polypeptides (anti-CCP).
B. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is elevated in
70% of patients with active disease.
C. In early disease, rheumatoid factor is more accurate
than anti-CCP .
D. Fewer than one-third of unselected patients with
positive rheumatoid factor will have RA.
E. Radiographs should be performed in this patient to
help with diagnosis.
IX-62.    A 34-year-old woman is seen in the allergy clinic for
complaint of chronic rhinitis. She reports that she ﬁrst
developed seasonal rhinitis in her early twenties, limitedto the fall of the year. At that point, she would use di-phenhydramine on an as-needed basis, but she limitedher use because of the sedating side effects. Since shemoved into her current home 5 years ago, her symptomshave become continuous. She states her nose stays con-gested, and she has constant postnasal drip. She awakensfrequently at night with a cough and complains of day-time fatigue due to inadequate sleep. She currently is tak-ing fexofenadine, 180 mg daily, but states she feels norelief from her symptoms. At night, she will occasionallytake diphenhydramine because of its sedating side effects.Her past medical history is signiﬁcant for eczema, forwhich she uses topical steroid creams, and frequent mi-graines requiring propranolol for prophylaxis. She is al-lergic to ragweed. She has no other known environmentalallergens but has never had skin-prick testing. She doesnot smoke cigarettes or consume alcohol. She works as alibrarian in a new building. Her home is a wooden singlefamily home built in the 1930s. There is carpetingthroughout the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the home, including the bed-room. The basement is not ﬁnished and has been ﬂoodedin the past. She has a 1-year old cat that lives indoors. Onphysical examination, she has large and boggy nasal tur-binates. Her posterior oropharynx shows evidence ofcobblestoning. Her lungs are clear without wheezes. Skin-prick testing demonstrates allergic responses to ragweed,grass, cat and dog dander, and dust mites. All of the fol-lowing would be appropriate initial therapy in this pa-tient except
A. immunotherapy for cat danderB. intranasal mometasone furoateC. oral montelukastD. removal of carpets and drapes from the bedroomE. weekly laundry of the bedding at temperatures
>54.4°C
IX-63.    A 46-year-old woman presents to your clinic with
multiple complaints. She describes fatigue and generalmalaise over 2–3 months. Her appetite has decreased. Shethinks she has unintentionally lost ~5.5 kg. Lately shenotes pain and stiffness in her ﬁngers on both hands thatis worse in the morning and with repetitive movement.She has a grandmother and a sister who have rheumatoidarthritis (RA), and she is very concerned that she now hasit as well. Which of her complaints represents the mostcommon manifestation of established RA?
A. Fatigue and anorexia for >2 months with concomi-
tant joint pain 
B. Morning joint stiffness lasting for >1 h
C. Pain in symmetric joints worsened with movementD. Positive family history with two relatives with RAE. Weight loss >4.5 kg during period of active disease
IX-64.    A 23-year-old man seeks evaluation for low back
pain. He states that when he ﬁrst awakens there is a dullaching pain in his lower lumbar and gluteal region. Whenhe ﬁrst noticed the pain about 6 months ago, he thoughtthe pain might be related to his mattress, but it has wors-ened even after buying a new mattress. Most mornings, ittakes about 45–60 min to loosen up after he has awak-ened, but the pain will recur if he is idle. He is currentlyin law school and ﬁnds it increasingly difﬁcult to remainin classes because of back pain. When he exercises, thepain lessens. There are occasional nights that the pain willawaken him from sleep, and he will have to move aroundand stretch his back to improve the pain. On physical ex-amination, there is pain with palpation at the iliac crests,ischial tuberosities, greater trochanters, and heels. Withmaximal inspiration, the chest expands 4 cm, and there isdecreased ﬂexion of the lumbar spine. A radiograph ofthe pelvis shows erosions and sclerosis of the sacroiliacjoints bilaterally. Which of the following tests is mostlikely to be positive in this individual?
A. Alkaline phosphatase
B. Antibodies directed against cyclic citrullinated pep-
tides (CCP)
C. Antinuclear antibodiesD. HLA-B27E. Rheumatoid factor
IX-65.    All the following organisms have been implicated in
reactive arthritis except
A. Chlamydia trachomatis
B. Neisseria gonorrhoeae
C. Salmonella enteritidis
D. Shigella dysenteriae
E. Yersinia enterocoliticaIX-62. (Continued)
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 357
IX-66.   An 84-year-old man is seen by his primary care pro-
vider with symptoms of acute gouty arthritis in the ﬁrst
great toe and ankle on the left. He has a prior history ofgout presenting similarly. His past medical history is signif-icant for myelodysplasia, congestive heart failure, hyper-cholesterolemia, and chronic kidney disease. He is takingpravastatin, aspirin, furosemide, metolazone, lisinopril,and metoprolol XL. His baseline creatinine is 2.4 mg/dL,and uric acid level 9.3 mg/dL. His most recent completeblood count results are white blood cell count 2880/ µL, he-
moglobin 8.2 g/dL, hematocrit 26.2%, and platelet 68,000/µL. Which of the following medication regimens are most
appropriate for the treatment of this patient?
A. Allopurinol, 100 mg once daily
B. Colchicine, 1 mg IV once, then 0.5 mg IV every 6 h
until improvement
C. Indomethacin, 25 mg three times dailyD. Prednisone, 40 mg once dailyE. Probenecid, 250 mg twice daily
IX-67.    A patient with primary Sjögren’s syndrome that
was diagnosed 6 years ago and treated with tear replace-ment for symptomatic relief notes continued parotidswelling for the last 3 months. She has also noted enlarg-ing posterior cervical lymph nodes. Evaluation showsleukopenia and low C4 complement levels. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Chronic pancreatitis
B. Secondary Sjögren’s syndromeC. HIV infectionD. LymphomaE. Amyloidosis
IX-68.    A 19-year-old recent immigrant from Ethiopia
comes to your clinic to establish primary care. She cur-rently feels well. Her past medical history is notable for arecent admission to the hospital for new-onset atrial ﬁ-brillation. As a child in Ethiopia, she developed an ill-ness that caused uncontrolled ﬂailing of her limbs andtongue lasting ~1 month. She also has had three epi-sodes of migratory large-joint arthritis during her ado-lescence that resolved with pills that she received fromthe pharmacy. She is currently taking metoprolol andwarfarin and has no known drug allergies. Physical ex-amination reveals an irregularly irregular heart beatwith normal blood pressure. Her Point of Maximal Im-pluse (PMI) is most prominent at the mid clavicular lineand is normal in size. An early diastolic rumble and 3/6holosystolic murmur are heard at the apex. A soft earlydiastolic murmur is also heard at the left third intercos-tal space. Y ou refer her to a cardiologist for evaluation ofvalve replacement and echocardiography. What otherintervention might you consider at this time?
A. Glucocorticoids
B. Daily aspirinC. Daily doxycyclineD. Monthly penicillin G injectionsE. Penicillin G injections as needed for all sore throatsIX-67. (Continued)
358IX. RHEUMATOLOGY AND IMMUNOLOGY
ANSWERS
IX-1. The answer is A.   (Chap. 326)   Osteoarthritis (OA) represents joint failure in which
pathologic changes have occurred in all structures of the affected joint. The central pa-
thology in OA is articular cartilage loss. The components leading to the development ofOA can be separated into those that contribute to joint loading and those that increasejoint vulnerability. The most potent risk factor for OA, however, is aging. Approximately70% of women >65 years have OA. A young joint has in place protective mechanisms thatallow it to tolerate excessive loading without lasting damage. Gender does not play a sig-niﬁcant role in terms of risk. Joint injury is a strong predictor of the future developmentof osteoarthritis. Obesity is a well-recognized risk factor in hip and knee arthritis likelydue to increased loading forces. Obesity appears to play a role in OA of the hand as well,suggesting that obesity has both a mechanical and metabolic mechanism of action. Thegenetics of OA are not well understood. Inherited polymorphisms appear to play a rolein hand and hip OA but not as much in other joints.
IX-2. The answer is E.   (Chap. 16)   This patient’s symptoms are most consistent with abnor-
malities of the C8 or T1 nerve roots. The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is possible, but hissymptoms are not consistent with diabetic neuropathy, which would more commonly besymmetric in both hands. The patient does not have any other signs or symptoms of sys-temic vasculitis and does not describe risk factors or other ﬁndings consistent with cho-lesterol emboli. Cervical spondylosis is possible, but this is typically a disease process ofC2–C4 nerve roots and presents with pain in the neck radiating into the back of the head,shoulders, and arms. The thoracic outlet contains the ﬁrst rib, the subclavian artery andvein, the brachial plexus, the clavicle, and the lung apex. Neurogenic thoracic outlet syn-drome results from compression of the lower brachial plexus. Signs may include weak-ness of the intrinsic muscles of the hand and diminished sensation on the palmar surfaceof the fourth and ﬁfth digits. EMG testing and imaging with either contrast CT scan ormagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) conﬁrms the diagnosis. Treatment consists of surgi-cal decompression of the brachial plexus. Other forms of thoracic outlet syndrome(TOS) include arterial TOS, which results in compression of the vasculature and subse-quent thrombus formation, and disputed TOS, which is described in patients withchronic arm and shoulder pain with an unclear etiology.
IX-3. The answer is E.   (Chap. 319)   This patient has polyarteritis nodosa associated with hep-
atitis B infection. Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a small- and medium-vessel vasculitisthat classically involves the muscular mesenteric and renal arteries. Pulmonary arteriesare spared. Classic PAN is a rare disease, but its exact prevalence is unknown because re-ported cases frequently also include other vasculidities such as microscopic polyangiitis.Prior to the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference of 1992, microscopic polyangiitis andPAN were considered as the same disease, but it has been recognized that these are twoseparate diseases with different serologic markers and vascular predilection. Clinicalmanifestations of PAN are commonly vague, and often patients have been ill for severalmonths prior to diagnosis. Symptoms include fatigue, weight loss, abdominal pain, head-ache, and hypertension. The pathologic lesion of PAN is necrotizing inﬂammation of thesmall- and medium-sized muscular arteries, and diagnosis relies upon demonstration ofthis lesion on biopsy. However, in the absence of easily obtainable tissue, the presence ofmultiple aneurysmal dilatations on mesenteric angiogram are highly suggestive of PAN
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 359
in the appropriate clinical setting. There are no serologic tests that are diagnostic of PAN.
It is rare to have positive antibodies to p-ANCA or c-ANCA in PAN. Interestingly, 30% ofcases of PAN are associated with active hepatitis B infection as in this patient, and it isthought that circulating immune complexes may play a role in the pathogenesis of thisdisease. Unlike PAN, MPA involves venules and capillaries in addition to small arteries.The histopathologic lesion of MPA is a necrotizing vasculitis that is pauci-immune withminimal deposition of immune complexes. Typical presenting features are rapidly pro-gressive glomerulonephritis and pulmonary hemorrhage, which are distinctly uncom-mon features of PAN. Antimyeloperoxidase antibodies (p-ANCA) are frequently present.Mixed cryoglobulinemia is a small-vessel vasculitis most often associated with hepatitis Cinfection. Skin involvement with leukocytoclastic vasculitis and palpable purpura are themost common presenting features. Proliferative glomerulonephritis is present in 20–60%of individuals and is the most common cause of morbidity. Ischemic colitis typically pre-sents with abdominal pain out of proportion to the examination as in this case, but themesenteric angiogram would show atherosclerotic narrowing rather than aneurysmal di-latation. Hepatocellular carcinoma is not associated with vasculitis and typically presentswith vague abdominal pain and obstructive jaundice.
IX-4. The answer is A.   (Chap. 324)   This patient presents with a multisystem illness involving
the heart, kidneys, and peripheral nervous system. The physical examination is suggestiveof amyloidosis with classic waxy papules in the folds of his body. The laboratories are re-markable for renal failure of unclear etiology with signiﬁcant proteinuria but no cellularcasts. A possible etiology of the renal failure is suggested by the elevated gamma globulinfraction and low hematocrit, bringing to mind a monoclonal gammopathy perhaps lead-ing to renal failure through amyloid AL deposition. This could also account for the en-larged heart seen on the echocardiogram and the peripheral neuropathy. The fat padbiopsy is generally reported to be 60 to 80% sensitive for amyloid; however, it would notallow a diagnosis of this patient’s likely myeloma. A right heart catheterization probablywould prove that the patient has restrictive cardiomyopathy secondary to amyloid depo-sition; however, it too would not diagnose the underlying plasma cell dyscrasia. Renal ul-trasound, although warranted to rule out obstructive uropathy, would not be diagnostic.Similarly, the electromyogram and nerve conduction studies would not be diagnostic.The bone marrow biopsy is about 50 to 60% sensitive for amyloid, but it would allowevaluation of the percent of plasma cells in the bone marrow and allow the diagnosis ofmultiple myeloma to be made. Multiple myeloma is associated with amyloid AL in ap-proximately 20% of cases. Light chains most commonly deposit systemically in the heart,kidneys, liver, and nervous system, causing organ dysfunction. In these organs, biopsywould show the classic eosinophilic material that, when exposed to Congo red stain, has acharacteristic apple-green birefringence.
IX-5. The answer is E.   (Chap. 321)   Eye inﬂammation (60% of cases) and arthritis (>70% of
cases) can be suggestive of either rheumatoid arthritis or relapsing polychondritis. Thearthritis associated with RA is typically erosive and symmetric, unlike that in relapsingpolychondritis. Both conditions can present with vasculitis (15% in relapsing polychon-dritis). Rheumatoid factor is occasionally positive in relapsing polychondritis but is usu-ally low titer when present. Saddle-nose deformity, which is present in 25% of patientswith relapsing polychondritis, may be confused with Wegener’s granulomatosis.
IX-6. The answer is B.   (Chap. 328)   Though the crystals suggest that the patient has active
pseudogout, the more important diagnosis acutely is septic arthritis. This is highly prob-able based on the joint leukocyte count >100,000/ µL, high percentage of PMNs, and pos-
itive Gram stain. Crystal-induced, rheumatoid, and other noninfectious causes ofarthritis typically have WBC counts in the 30,000–50,000/µL range. WBC counts in indo-lent infections such as fungal or mycobacterial arthritis are commonly in the 10,000–30,000/µL range. The bacteria of septic arthritis usually enter the joint via hematogenousspread through synovial capillaries. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis are at high risk ofa septic arthritis due to Staphylococcus aureus  because of chronic inﬂammation and glu-
360 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
cocorticoid therapy. The concurrent presence of pseudogout does not preclude the diag-
nosis of septic arthritis. In adults, the most common bacterial pathogens are Neisseria
gonorrhoeae and S. aureus . Antibiotics, prompt surgical evaluation of possible arthro-
scopic drainage, and blood cultures to rule out bacteremia are all indicated. Prompt localand systemic treatment of infection can prevent destruction of cartilage, joint instability,or deformity. Direct instillation of antibiotics into the joint ﬂuid is not necessary. If thesmear shows no organisms, a third-generation cephalosporin is reasonable empiricaltherapy. In the presence of Gram-positive cocci in clusters, antistaphylococcal therapyshould be instituted based on community prevalence of methicillin resistance or recenthospitalization (which would favor empirical vancomycin). Typically acute ﬂairs ofpseudogout can be addressed with glucocorticoids. However, this could portend a higherrisk in the context of infection. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agents might be a possi-bility depending on the patient’s renal function and gastrointestinal history.
IX-7. The answer is A.   (Chap. 331)   Adhesive capsulitis is characterized by pain and restricted
motion of the shoulder. Usually this occurs in the absence of intrinsic shoulder disease, in-cluding osteoarthritis and avascular necrosis. It is, however, more common in patients whohave had bursitis or tendinitis previously as well as patients with other systemic illnesses, suchas chronic pulmonary disease, ischemic heart disease, and diabetes mellitus. The etiology isnot clear, but adhesive capsulitis appears to develop in the setting of prolonged immobility.Reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy may also occur in the setting of adhesive capsulitis. Clinically,this disorder is more commonly seen in females over age 50. Pain and stiffness develop overthe course of months to years. On physical examination, the affected joint is tender to palpa-tion, with a restricted range of motion. The gold standard for diagnosis is arthrography withlimitation of the amount of injectable contrast to less than 15 mL. In most patients, adhesivecapsulitis will regress spontaneously within 1 to 3 years. NSAIDs, glucocorticoid injections,physical therapy, and early mobilization of the arm are useful therapies.
IX-8. The answer is B.   (Chap. 317)   The patient in this vignette is presenting with severe dry
eyes and mouth in the presence of autoantibodies to Ro and La (SS-A and SS-B, extractablenuclear and cytoplasmic antigens) consistent with the diagnosis of Sjögren’s syndrome.This autoimmune disorder is associated with lymphocytic inﬁltration of exocrine glandsthat results in decreased tear and saliva production as the most prominent symptoms.Sjögren’s syndrome affects women nine times more frequently than men and usually pre-sents in middle age. Other autoimmune diseases often have associated xerostomia and dryeyes (secondary Sjögren’s syndrome). High titers of antibodies to Ro and La are associatedwith longer disease duration, salivary gland enlargement, and the development of extra-glandular involvement, especially cutaneous vasculitis and demyelinating syndromes. One-third of patients with Sjögren’s syndrome have extraglandular involvement of the disease,most commonly in the lungs and kidneys. In this patient with acidemia and hypokalemia,the possibility of renal disease due to Sjögren’s syndrome should be considered. Interstitialnephritis is a common manifestation of Sjögren’s syndrome in the kidneys. Distal (type I)renal tubular acidosis is also frequent, occurring in 25% of individuals with Sjögren’s syn-drome. Diagnosis could be conﬁrmed by obtaining urine electrolytes to demonstrate a pos-itive urine anion gap. Renal biopsy is not necessary. Treatment does not requireimmunosuppression as the acidemia can be treated with bicarbonate replacement. Diar-rhea could cause similar electrolyte abnormalities with a non-anion gap acidosis, but thepatient would be symptomatic. Furthermore, gastrointestinal symptoms do not commonlyoccur in Sjögren’s syndrome. Hypoaldosteronism is associated with a type IV renal tubularacidosis that results in hyperkalemia and a non-anion gap acidosis. Renal compensation forrespiratory alkalosis should not result in hypokalemia. Purging in anorexia nervosa couldresult in hypokalemia and increased risk of dental caries, but it would be associated withmetabolic alkalosis rather than acidosis.
IX-9. The answer is A.   (Chap. 324)   Patients on hemodialysis are at risk for a particular type
of amyloidosis due to deposition of β
2-microglobulin (A β2M). The protein is above the
molecular weight cut-off for clearance by the dialysis membrane and is becoming less
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 361
common with the advent of newer dialysis techniques. The clinical syndrome is a rheuma-
tologic one, with joint effusions, arthropathy, and cystic bone lesions predominating. Theβ
2-microglobulin can be found in joint synovium, and the joint ﬂuid is usually nonin-
ﬂammatory. Serum amyloid A (secondary amyloid) is associated with chronic infectionsor inﬂammatory conditions. AL (immunoglobulin light chain deposition) is the mostcommon type of amyloidosis and is due to a clonal population of B cells. Deposition of theﬁbrinogen α-chain (AFib) is a familial condition associated with a systemic amyloidosis.
Transthyretin is associated with a familial form of amyloidosis that is transmitted in an au-tosomal dominant fashion. These usually manifest in midlife with neuropathy and cardio-myopathy. One variant of transthyretin amyloid has a carrier frequency of up to 4% inAfrican Americans and is associated with a late-onset cardiomyopathy.
IX-10. The answer is A.   (Chap. 383)   Polymyositis is an inﬂammatory myopathy that presents
as symmetric, progressive muscle weakness. The patient reports difﬁculty with everydaytasks requiring the use of proximal muscles, such as getting up from a chair and climbingsteps. Distal muscle strength is usually preserved until late in the course. In addition tothe musculoskeletal ﬁndings, there are numerous extramuscular manifestations. This pa-tient may have systemic symptoms of fever, malaise, weight loss, and Raynaud’s phenom-enon. There may be “overlap” features with other autoimmune diseases, such as systemiclupus erythematosus (SLE) and scleroderma. Involvement of the striated muscles and theupper esophagus may lead to dysphagia. Conduction defects, arrhythmia, and dilatedcardiomyopathy may occur. Interstitial lung disease may precede myopathy or occurearly in the disease, often in association with the presence of antibodies to t-RNA syn-thetases. Although dermatomyositis is linked with an increased incidence of cancer, poly-myositis does not seem to be associated with an increased incidence.
IX-11. The answer is C.   (Chap. 327)   Acute gouty arthritis is frequently seen in individuals on
diuretic therapy. Diuretics result in hyperuricemia through enhanced urate reabsorption inthe proximal tubule of the kidney in the setting of volume depletion. Hyperuricemia re-mains asymptomatic in many individuals but may manifest as acute gout. Acute gout is anintensely inﬂammatory arthritis that frequently begins at night. While any joint may be af-fected, the initial presentation of gout is often in the great toe at the metatarsophalangealjoint. There is associated joint swelling, effusion, erythema, and exquisite tenderness. A typ-ical patient will complain that the pain is so great that they are unable to wear socks or allowsheets or blankets to cover the toes. Arthrocentesis will reveal an inﬂammatory cloudy-appearing ﬂuid. The diagnosis of gout is conﬁrmed by the demonstration of monosodiumurate crystals seen both extracellularly and intracellularly within neutrophils. Monosodiumurate crystals appear strongly negatively birefringent under polarized light microscopy andhave a typical needle- and rod-shaped appearance. The WBC count is usually <50,000/ µL
with values >100,000/ µL being more likely to be associated with a septic arthritis. Likewise,
very low glucose levels and a positive Gram stain are not manifestations of acute gout butare common in septic arthritis. Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals appear as weaklypositively birefringent rhomboidal crystals and are seen in pseudogout.
IX-12.  and.  IX-13.   The answers are E and E.   (Chap. 313)   This patient is presenting with symp-
toms that are consistent with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). SLE can present with awide variety of complaints affecting every organ system. The most common complaintswith SLE are fatigue (95%), arthralgias (95%), photosensitivity (70%), anemia (70%), leu-kopenia (65%), and nonerosive polyarthritis (60%)—all of which are present in this pa-tient. In addition, this patient has mouth ulcers, which are seen in 40%. The scalp lesion isconsistent with discoid lupus erythematosus, which can be a benign condition if presentingas an isolated condition. Only 5% of individuals with isolated discoid lesions develop SLE;however, up to 20% of those with SLE will have discoid lesions. The presence of a positiveANA is sensitive, but not speciﬁc, for SLE as 98% of individuals with SLE will have a posi-tive ANA during the course of the disease. Alternatively, persistent negative ANA results canrule out SLE. Antibodies to double-stranded DNA and to the Smith protein (nuclear U1RNA) are both speciﬁc for SLE in high titers. Some 70% of individuals with SLE will have
362 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
positive antibodies for ds-DNA, and 25% will have antibodies to the Smith protein. Indi-
viduals with anti-Sm antibodies often also have antibodies to ribonucleoprotein as well.The level of rheumatoid factor in this patient falls within the equivocal range and is not di-agnostic of rheumatoid arthritis. Further, the patient’s discoid rash and photosensitivity aswell as positive serologies would further eliminate rheumatoid arthritis from the differen-tial diagnosis. Behçet’s disease presents with oral and genital ulcerations, and 50% will alsohave nonerosive arthritis. However, the skin lesions for Behçet’s disease do not usually ap-pear as discoid lesions, and Behçet’s is inconsistent with the serology studies. Finally, sarcoi-dosis can mimic the arthritic disease of SLE. The rash associated with sarcoidosis is papularlesions along the nasolabial folds (lupus pernio) and erythema nodosum.
Nephritis is the most serious manifestation of SLE and, with infection, is the leading
cause of death in the ﬁrst decade following diagnosis. However, in most individuals, ne-phritis is clinically silent until the disease is advanced. For this reason, it is recommendedthat all patients suspected of having SLE undergo a urinalysis. In the presence of nephri-tis, the expected ﬁndings would include microscopic hematuria and proteinuria in earlydisease. In more severe disease, red cell casts and nephrotic range proteinuria may beseen. A skin biopsy of the discoid lesion would show hyperkeratosis and follicular plug-ging. A mononuclear cell inﬁltrate is often seen near the dermal-epidermal junction.While a biopsy would be diagnostic for discoid lupus, it would not alter management. Anelectrocardiogram would be indicated if the patient were complaining of pain consistentwith pericarditis. Likewise, the presence of a murmur on examination may prompt anechocardiogram to assess for Libmann-Sachs valvular disease in a patient with SLE.However, these tests are not indicated in an asymptomatic patient. If sarcoidosis were be-ing considered, chest radiography would be appropriate to assess for hilar lymphadenop-athy and interstitial lung disease, but they are not indicated in this case.
IX-14. The answer is D.   (Chap. 311)   Urticaria and angioedema are common disorders, affect-
ing approximately 20% of the population. In acute urticarial angioedema, attacks of swell-ing are of less than 6 weeks’ duration; chronic urticarial angioedema is by deﬁnition morelong-standing. Urticaria usually is pruritic and affects the trunk and proximal extremities.Angioedema is generally less pruritic and affects the hands, feet, genitalia, and face. This fe-male has chronic urticaria, which probably is due to a cutaneous necrotizing vasculitis. Theclues to the diagnosis are the arthralgias, the presence of residual skin discoloration, and theelevated sedimentation rate, which would be uncharacteristic of other urticarial diseases.The diagnosis can be conﬁrmed by skin biopsy. Chronic urticaria rarely has an allergiccause; hence, allergy skin tests and measurement of total IgE levels are not helpful. Measure-ment of C1 esterase inhibitor activity is useful in diagnosing hereditary angioedema, a dis-ease that is not associated with urticaria. Patch tests are used to diagnose contact dermatitis.
IX-15. The answer is B.   (Chap. 331)   The plantar fascia is a thick ﬁbrous band that extends from
the medial tuberosity of the calcaneus to insert on each of the ﬁve metatarsal heads. Plantarfasciitis is thought to be the result of repeated microtrauma to the tissue. It is a common dis-order leading to foot pain and can be diagnosed on the basis of history and physical exami-nation alone. All of the imaging modalities listed above can support the diagnosis, but bythemselves are neither sufﬁcient nor necessary for diagnosis. Management includes stretch-ing and orthotics in addition to reducing activities that elicit pain. Local glucocorticoid in-jections have also been shown effective but may have a risk of plantar fascia rupture. Thedifferential diagnosis includes calcaneal stress fracture, spondyloarthropathy, rheumatoid ar-thritis, gout, neoplastic or inﬁltrative bone processes, and nerve entrapment/compressionsyndromes. 
IX-16. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 325 and 328; Baker, N Engl J Med 329:1013–1020, 1993.)   The
analysis of synovial ﬂuid begins at the bedside. When ﬂuid is withdrawn from a joint into asyringe, its clarity and color should be assessed. Cloudiness or turbidity is caused by thescattering of light as it is reﬂected off particles in the ﬂuid; these particles are usually whiteblood cells, although crystals may also be present. The viscosity of synovial ﬂuid is due toits hyaluronate content. In patients with inﬂammatory joint disease, synovial ﬂuid contains
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 363
enzymes that break down hyaluronate and reduce ﬂuid viscosity. In contrast, synovial ﬂuid
taken from a joint in a person with a degenerative joint disease, a noninﬂammatory condi-tion, would be expected to be clear and have good viscosity. The color of the ﬂuid can indi-cate recent or old hemorrhage into the joint space. Pigmented villonodular synovitis isassociated with noninﬂammatory ﬂuid that is dark brown in color (“crankcase oil”) as aresult of repeated hemorrhage into the joint. Gout and calcium pyrophosphate depositiondisease produce inﬂammatory synovial effusions, which are cloudy and watery. In addi-tion, these disorders may be diagnosed by identiﬁcation of crystals in the ﬂuid: Sodiumurate crystals of gout are needle-like and strongly negatively birefringent, whereas calciumpyrophosphate crystals are rhomboidal and weakly positively birefringent.
IX-17. The answer is A.   (Chap. 318)   Reactive arthritis is an acute inﬂammatory arthritis that oc-
curs in the context of an infection elsewhere in the body. The most common causes of reac-tive arthritis are diarrhea and urethritis. Individuals with reactive arthritis typically presentwith asymmetric polyarthritis with associated fever, fatigue, and weight loss. Most oftenthese symptoms begin 1–4 weeks after an antecedent illness. The arthritis usually begins witha single joint affected, but additional joints become inﬂamed over the next 1–2 weeks. Thearthritis is painful with frequent effusions present. The most commonly affected joints arethose of the lower extremities. Dactylitis presenting as a “sausage digit” with diffuse swellingof a single toe or ﬁnger may occur. Pain at tendinous insertion, known as enthesitis , is also a
feature of reactive arthritis. Extraarticular manifestations of reactive arthritis include urethri-tis, prostatitis, uveitis, and oral ulcers. In rare instances, life-threatening systemic manifesta-tions can occur including cardiac conduction defects, aortic insufﬁciency, pulmonaryinﬁltrates, and central nervous system disease. The arthritis typically persists for 3–5 monthsand can be present for up to a year. Fifteen percent of individuals will develop chronic jointsymptoms, and relapses with recurrence of acute arthritis may occur. Risk factors for a worseoutcome include presence of HLA-B27 antigen and epidemic shigellosis.
IX-18. The answer is E.   (Chap. 318)   Anti-TNF- α therapy for rheumatoid arthritis has been
used since 2000. Two agents are currently used. Inﬂiximab is a chimeric human-mouseanti-TNF- α monoclonal antibody, and etanercept is a soluble p75 TNF- α monoclonal anti-
body. These agents are potent immunosuppressants, and six types of common side effectshave been described. Serious infections are most frequently seen, with a marked increase indisseminated tuberculosis. Other side effects include pancytopenia, demyelinating disor-ders, exacerbations of congestive heart failure, hypersensitivity to the infusion or injection,and the development of drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus. An increased inci-dence of malignancy is of theoretical concern, but this has not been borne out in the limitedfollow-up of patients treated with these drugs. Pulmonary ﬁbrosis has not been reported.
IX-19. The answer is E.   (Chap. 315)   This patient has a small-joint, symmetric polyarthritis in
the setting of a very recent sore throat. Although acute HIV commonly presents with asore throat, other common features, such as rash, are missing. Moreover, the incubationperiod between this patient’s high-risk sexual encounter and clinical syndrome would betoo short for acute HIV infection. Certainly, this patient should be screened for HIV in-fection. The patient meets clinical criteria for group A Streptococcus  throat infection
given his recent fever, pustular exudates on examination, tender cervical lymph nodes,and lack of cough. His syndrome is consistent with a reactive arthritis, given the symmet-ric small-joint involvement and very short incubation period. Acute rheumatic fever isalso seen with streptococcal throat infections but is very uncommon in the developedworld. One would expect to see a latency period ranging between 1 and 5 weeks betweenresolution of sore throat and arthritis; asymmetric large-joint involvement; and possiblyevidence of carditis, chorea, erythema marginatum, or subcutaneous nodules to suspecta diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever. Gonococcal infection can cause pharyngitis but ismore commonly associated with single large-joint infection or enthesopathy, but notsmall-joint polyarthritis. Lyme disease is a clinical diagnosis contingent upon tick expo-sure, a classic target lesion rash, and, if present, a migratory large-joint arthritis.
364 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
IX-20. The answer is E.   (Chap. 313)   Although most clinicians believe that females with SLE
should not become pregnant if they have active disease or advanced renal or cardiac dis-
ease, the presence of SLE itself is not an absolute contraindication to pregnancy. The out-come of pregnancy is best for females who are in remission at the time of conception.Even in females with quiescent disease, exacerbations may occur (usually in the ﬁrst tri-mester and the immediate postpartum period), and 25 to 40% of these pregnancies endin spontaneous abortion. Fetal loss rates are higher in patients with lupus anticoagulantor anticardiolipin antibodies. Flare-ups should be anticipated and vigorously treatedwith steroids. Steroids given throughout pregnancy also usually have no adverse effectson the child. In this case, the fact that the female had a life-threatening bout of disease ayear ago would argue against stopping her drugs at this time. Neonatal lupus, which ismanifested by thrombocytopenia, rash, and heart block, is rare but can occur whenmothers have anti-Ro antibodies.
IX-21. The answer is B.   (Chap. 318)   Before the introduction of anti-tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) α therapy, the mainstay of treatment for ankylosing spondylitis was nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and exercise therapy. In 2000, inﬂiximab and etaner-cept were introduced and since that time have been shown to confer a rapid, profound,and sustained reduction in all clinical and laboratory measures of disease activity. Evenpatients with long-standing disease and ankylosis show signiﬁcant improvement in spi-nal mobility and pain relief. MRI ﬁndings in patients treated with these agents also showmarked improvement in marrow edema, enthesitis, and joint effusions. The long-termeffects of these agents are not known.
Other treatments for AS can be used, including NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors, to de-
crease pain, especially in mild cases. An ongoing exercise program is encouraged to main-tain posture and range of motion. In patients with more severe pain, sulfasalazine ormethotrexate may be added with modest beneﬁt, especially in those with peripheral ar-thritis. Diverse other agents have been tried, including thalidomide, bisphosphonates,and radium-224. Glucocorticoids have no role in the treatment of this disease.
IX-22. The answer is B.   (Chap. 319)   This patient is presenting with amaurosis fugax with evi-
dence of decreased visual acuity and anterior ischemic optic neuropathy in the setting of acompatible clinical history of giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis). In an individual >50years, this clinical history should prompt immediate initiation of glucocorticoids in orderto prevent the development of monocular blindness. Giant cell arteritis is exquisitely sen-sitive to steroid therapy, and initiation of prednisone, 40–60 mg daily, is usually effective atmanaging the symptoms. If ocular symptoms recur, prednisone may be increased further.Once symptoms are controlled, gradual tapering of the steroid dose should occur. Mostpatients do require prolonged courses of steroid, usually for >2 years. The elevation in ESRcan be a useful marker of disease activity during a steroid taper. Aspirin is often used incombination with glucocorticoids as it has been shown to decrease ischemic complica-tions of giant cell arteritis. Indomethacin is not frequently used and should not be usedalone in a patient presenting with symptoms of ischemic optic neuropathy. There is norole for anticoagulation in the treatment of giant cell arteritis. Deﬁnitive diagnosis of giantcell arteritis is conﬁrmed by temporal artery biopsy, which should be performed in thispatient. However, treatment should not be withheld for performance of the biopsy as sud-den and irreversible blindness may occur. Ultrasonography of the temporal artery mayalso be a suggestive. While the patient’s age and history of coronary artery disease raise thesuspicion of a transient ischemic attack, the patient’s other symptoms in this case make gi-ant cell arteritis more likely. These symptoms are chronic, occurring over the several weeksto months prior to presentation. The symptoms include new-onset headache, jaw claudi-cation, scalp pain, and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica. In this clinical setting, per-formance of magnetic resonance angiography would not be indicated.
IX-23. The answer is C.   (Chap. 16)   Acute low back pain is deﬁned as pain of less than 3
months’ duration. Most patients with back pain have symptoms that are “mechanical,”such as pain that is worsened by activity and relieved by rest. Initial assessment of all
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 365
these patients must evaluate for serious causes of spine pathology, such as infection, ma-
lignant disease, and trauma. Risk factors include age over 50 years, prior diagnosis of can-cer, intravenous drug use, chronic infection such as cystitis or pneumonia, a history ofspine trauma, bed rest without relief, duration of pain of more than 1 month, urinary in-continence or nocturia, focal leg weakness or numbness, pain radiating into the leg orlegs from the back, pain that increases with standing and is relieved by sitting, andchronic steroid use. Examination ﬁndings that raise concern for serious underlying dis-ease include fever, weight loss, a positive straight leg raise, an abdominal or rectal mass,and neurologic examination abnormalities, either motor or sensory.
IX-24. The answer is C.   (Chap. 313)   Drug-induced lupus can occur with a variety of medica-
tions and should be considered when individuals present atypically. Individuals withdrug-induced lupus are more likely to be male and of Caucasian race. Drug-induced lu-pus usually presents with fever, malaise, intense arthralgias/myalgias, serositis, and rash.The brain and kidneys are rarely involved. Discontinuation of the medication usuallyleads to resolution of the symptoms over a period of weeks, although anti-inﬂammatorymedications may need to be utilized to control symptoms until the inﬂammation sub-sides. Common drugs that cause lupus include procainamide, propafenone, hydralazine,propylthiouracil, lithium, phenytoin, carbamazepine, sulfasalazine, and minocycline.Beta blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, lovastatin, and simvastatinhave also been reported to cause drug-induced lupus. Antibody testing usually reveals apositive antinuclear antibody and antihistone antibodies. Antibodies to ds-DNA are rare.Anticardiolipin antibodies are seen in antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, whichwould present with arterial and venous thromboembolic disease. Anti-RNP antibodiesare seen with mixed connective tissue disease that usually presents with features of lupus,rheumatoid arthritis, and/or scleroderma. Anti-ribosomal P antibodies are associatedwith depression and psychosis with central nervous system involvement of SLE.
IX-25. The answer is D.   (Chap. 311)   This patient presents with symptoms of cold urticaria, an
IgE-dependent urticarial reaction to cold exposure. After exposure to cold, urticarial lesionsappear in exposed areas and usually last for <2 h. Histologic examination of the urticariallesion would demonstrate mast cell degranulation with edema of the dermis and subcuta-neous tissues. In experimental exposure to a cold challenge such as an ice water bath, ele-vated levels of histamine in venous blood may be demonstrated if assessed in the extremityexposed to a cold environment, whereas the histamine levels would be normal in a nonex-posed extremity. The appearance of a linear wheal after a ﬁrm stroke is indicative of der-matographism. This condition can be seen in 1–4% of the population and is often found inindividuals with cold urticaria. In general, cold urticaria is a localized process without ad-verse consequences. However, vascular collapse may occur if an individual is submerged incold water. Many individuals request treatment because they are embarrassed by their con-dition or are symptomatic from the recurrent urticaria and pruritus. Treatment with H
1
histamine receptor blockers is usually adequate for symptom control. Cyproheptadine orhydroxyzine can be added to therapy if H
1 antihistamines are inadequate. In this patient,
there is a clear precipitant for developing urticaria—cold exposure. Thus, no other evalua-tion is necessary. In the evaluation and management of chronic urticaria, identiﬁcation andelimination of precipitating factors are important. Possible etiologic factors include foods,pollens, molds, and medications. In this case the urticaria predates the use of oral contra-ceptive medications; thus, stopping oral contraceptives would be unlikely to be helpful. As-sessment of antithyroglobulin and antimicrosomal antibodies can be helpful in individualswith chronic urticaria in whom a cause is not otherwise identiﬁed. Deﬁciency of C1 or thepresence of a C1 inhibitor presents as recurrent angioedema rather than urticaria.
IX-26. The answer is B.   (Chap. 319)   The presenting symptoms of this patient include rapidly
progressive renal failure, sinusitis, and cavitary lung disease. These symptoms are consis-tent with the diagnosis of Wegener’s granulomatosis (WG). WG is characterized by granu-lomatous vasculitis of small vessels that primarily manifests in the airways and kidneys. Anuncommon disease, WG has an estimated prevalence of 3 per 100,000 population. The
366 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
male-to-female ratio is equal. The upper airway is involved in 95% of patients and, in this
setting, the disease often presents as chronic sinusitis unresponsive to antibiotic therapy.Facial pain and bloody nasal discharge are commonly present. Untreated disease canprogress to complete cartilaginous destruction with nasal septal perforation and saddle-nose deformity. The lungs are the second most commonly affected organ in about 85% ofindividuals with WG. The spectrum of lung disease may vary widely from asymptomaticpulmonary inﬁltrates to massive hemoptysis. In this patient, there are characteristic cavi-tary lung lesions that help to differentiate WG from microscopic polyangiitis, as no cavi-tary disease is seen in microscopic polyangiitis. Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis ispresent in 77% of patients and is responsible for the majority of deaths in WG. Nonspe-ciﬁc symptoms are also present when the disease is active including fatigue, weight loss,and fevers. Diagnosis of WG is made by demonstration of necrotizing vasculitis on tissuebiopsy of an affected organ. Serologic testing can offer supporting evidence for the diag-nosis of WG. Ninety percent of individuals with WG will demonstrate antibodies to cyto-plasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA). The speciﬁc c-ANCA target inWG is proteinase-3. Rapid initiation of therapy is important. Prior to the use of cyclophos-phamide, WG was almost universally fatal within 5 years, even with the use of glucocorti-coids. With the combined use of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide, survival is now75–80% at 5 years. Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) are usu-ally directed against myeloperoxidase. The p-ANCA are seen in a minority of patients withWG but are more commonly present in microscopic polyangiitis. Antistreptolysin O anti-bodies are seen with poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. This patient’s prior upper res-piratory symptoms were primarily sinusitis and not associated with pharyngitis, and theCT scan of the chest would not be expected to be abnormal.
Antiglomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibodies are present in Goodpas-
ture’s syndrome. This pulmonary-renal syndrome frequently presents with rapidly pro-gressive glomerulonephritis and respiratory failure. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage iscommon. The CT of the chest in Goodpasture’s syndrome would not be expected toshow cavitary lung lesions. Endocarditis due to S. aureus  may cause a similar CT appear-
ance with multiple septic emboli causing cavitary lung disease. However, the constella-tion of ﬁndings with sinusitis and glomerulonephritis would not be expected.
IX-27. The answer is C.   (Chap. 319; JW Newberger et al: Circulation 110:2747, 2004.)   The most
likely cause of the acute coronary syndrome in this patient is thrombosis of a coronary ar-tery aneurysm in an individual with a past history of Kawasaki disease. Kawasaki disease isan acute multisystem disease that primarily presents in children <5 years of age. The clinicalmanifestations in childhood are nonsuppurative cervical lymphadenitis; desquamation ofthe ﬁngertips; and erythema of the oral cavity, lips, and palms. Approximately 25% of casesare associated with coronary artery aneurysms that occur late in illness in the convalescentstage. Early treatment (within 7–10 days of onset) with IV immunoglobulin and high-doseaspirin decreases the risk of developing coronary aneurysms to about 5%. Even if coronaryartery aneurysms develop, most regress over the course of the ﬁrst year if the size is <6 mm.Aneurysms >8 mm, however, are unlikely to regress. Complications of persistent coronaryartery aneurysms include rupture, thrombosis and recanalization, and stenosis at the out-ﬂow area. Dissection of the aortic root and coronary ostia is a common cause of death inMarfan’s syndrome and can also be seen with aortitis due to Takayasu’s arteritis. In this pa-tient, there is no history of hypertension, limb ischemia, or systemic symptoms that wouldsuggest an active vasculitis. In addition, there are no other ischemic symptoms that wouldbe expected in Takayasu’s arteritis. Myocardial bridging overlying a coronary artery is seenfrequently at autopsy but is an unusual cause of ischemia. The possibility of cocaine use as acause of myocardial ischemia in a young individual must be considered, but given the clini-cal history, it is a less likely cause of ischemia in this case.
IX-28. The answer is E.   (Chap. 308; Frank, N Engl J Med 316:1525–1530, 1987.)    Complement
activity, which results from the sequential interaction of a large number of plasma andcell-membrane proteins, plays an important role in the inﬂammatory response. The clas-sic pathway of complement activation is initiated by an antibody-antigen interaction.
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 367
The ﬁrst complement component (C1, a complex composed of three proteins) binds to
immune complexes with activation mediated by C1q. Active C1 then initiates the cleav-age and concomitant activation of components C4 and C2. The activated C1 is destroyedby a plasma protease inhibitor termed C1 esterase inhibitor . This molecule also regulates
clotting factor XI and kallikrein. Patients with a deﬁciency of C1 esterase inhibitor maydevelop angioedema, sometimes leading to death by asphyxia. Attacks may be precipi-tated by stress or trauma. In addition to low antigenic or functional levels of C1 esteraseinhibitor, patients with this autosomal dominant condition may have normal levels of C1and C3 but low levels of C4 and C2. Danazol therapy produces a striking increase in thelevel of this important inhibitor and alleviates the symptoms in many patients. An ac-quired form of angioedema caused by a deﬁciency of C1 esterase inhibitor has been de-scribed in patients with autoimmune or malignant disease.
IX-29. The answer is A.   (Chap. 326)   OA is the most common type of arthritis. Roughly 12%
of the United States population above the age of 60 has evidence of OA of the knee. OA inthe hands may affect 10% of the elderly. Commonly affected sites include the cervical andlumbosacral spine, hip, and the knee. In the hands, both the proximal and distal inter-phalangeal joints are frequently affected. The wrist, elbow, and ankle are typically spared.The ankle joint’s articular cartilage may be the reason it is less susceptible to OA, but thisremains unclear. There is a notable difference between affected joints in osteoarthritis incomparison to rheumatoid arthritis (RA); the lumbar spine and distal interphalangealjoints are rarely affected in RA, and the wrist joints are almost always involved.
IX-30. The answer is B.   (Chap. 324)   Recurrent infections due to encapsulated organisms
strongly suggests asplenism. Functional asplenism along with easy bruising, neuropathy,and macroglossia suggests amyloidosis. Other ﬁndings that argue for amyloidosis are alope-cia, dystrophic nails, and the elevated globulin fraction. The functional asplenism of amy-loidosis is due to direct involvement of the spleen, although hypersplenism may be present.HIV-infected patients are more likely to have recurrent infections but without splenomeg-aly, and they are not more susceptible to encapsulated organisms than other patients. A newdiagnosis of sickle cell anemia is unlikely given the patient’s demographic. Cyclical neutro-penia usually occurs in children, although there are also adult forms. The cycle of cyclicalneutropenia is usually 3 weeks. X-linked agammaglobulinemia is a rare congenital disorderof males whose B cells do not mature. Patients with this disorder do not make immunoglo-bulins and develop severe upper respiratory infections, often with encapsulated organisms.
IX-31. The answer is B.   (Chap. 314)   The prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 0.8%, and
females are three times more likely to be affected than are males. However, as the popula-tion ages, the prevalence increases and the sex difference diminishes. RA is found through-out the world and affects people of all races. Age of onset is most commonly 35 to 50 years.Family studies show a clear genetic predisposition. First-degree relatives have approxi-mately four times the expected rate of RA. Other risk factors for RA include the class IImajor histocompatibility antigen HLA-DR4. Approximately 70% of patients with RA haveHLA-DR4. However, this association is not true in Africans or African Americans, amongwhom 75% do not show this allele. The role of this allele in the pathogenesis of RA re-mains unknown because the cause of RA is unknown. The earliest lesion in RA is mi-crovascular injury with an increase in the number of synovial lining cells. Increasednumbers of mononuclear cells are seen in the synovial lining, and this is thought to be un-der the control of CD4+ T lymphocytes. As the inﬂammation continues, the articular ma-trix is degraded by collagenases and cathepsins produced by the inﬂammatory cells. Othercytokines produced by the inﬂammatory cells include IL-1 and TNF-α . Over time, bone
and cartilage are destroyed, leading to the end-stage clinical manifestations. Rheumatoidfactor (RF) is an IgM molecule directed against the Fc portion of IgG and is found in two-thirds of patients with RA. However, this molecule is found in approximately 5% ofhealthy persons and more than 10% of persons older than age 60. It is not known to have arole in the pathogenesis of the disease, but titers of RF are shown to be predictive of the se-verity of clinical manifestations or the presence of extraarticular manifestations.
368 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
IX-32. The answer is B.   (Chap. 318)   Enthesopathy orenthesitis is the term used to describe in-
ﬂammation at the site of tendinous or ligamentous insertion into bone. This type of in-
ﬂammation is seen most frequently in patients with seronegative spondyloarthropathiesand various infections, especially viral infections. The other deﬁnitions apply to otherterms used in the orthopedic and rheumatic examination. Subluxation is the alteration of
joint alignment so that articulating surfaces incompletely approximate each other. Synovi-
tis refers to inﬂammation at the site of tendinous or ligamentous insertion into bone. In-
ﬂammation of a saclike cavity near a joint that decreases friction is the deﬁnition of bursitis .
Finally, crepitus is a palpable vibratory or crackling sensation elicited with joint motion.
IX-33. The answer is C.   (Chaps. 318 and 329)   This patient complains of symptoms consistent
with a diagnosis of ﬁbromyalgia. These patients frequently complain of diffuse bodypain, stiffness, paresthesias, disturbed sleep, easy fatigability, and headache. The preva-lence of ﬁbromyalgia is approximately 3.4% of females and 0.5% of males. This disorderis thought to represent a disturbance of pain perception. Disturbed sleep with a loss ofstage 4 sleep has been implicated as a factor in the pathogenesis of the disease. Serotoninlevels in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid have also commonly been seen and may play a role in thepathogenesis. A diagnosis of ﬁbromyalgia is based on the American College of Rheuma-tology criteria, which combine symptoms and physical examination. The patient mustexhibit diffuse pain in all areas of the body with tenderness to palpation at 11 of 18 desig-nated tender point sites. These sites include the occiput, trapezius, cervical spine, lateralepicondyles, supraspinatus muscle, second rib, gluteus, greater trochanter, and knee.Digital palpation should be performed with a moderate degree of pressure. Examinationof the joints shows no evidence of inﬂammatory arthropathy. There are no laboratorytests that are speciﬁc for the diagnosis. Positive antinuclear antibodies may be seen, but atthe same frequency as in the normal population. HLA-B27 is found in 7% of the whitepopulation, but only 1 to 6% of people with HLA-B27 will develop ankylosing spondyli-tis. Radiograms are normal in these patients.
IX-34. The answer is A.   (Chap. 329)   The ﬁrst step in the treatment of ﬁbromyalgia is to im-
prove the quality of the patient’s sleep. This has been shown to improve quality of life andreduce symptoms. Improving sleep hygiene through nonpharmacologic methods shouldbe encouraged, though tricyclic antidepressants are also recommended. Tricyclic antide-pressants improve stage 4 sleep, resulting in clinical improvement. Other treatments thathave shown improvement in sleep or symptoms independent of depressive disorder in-clude trazodone, zolpidem, and duloxetine. All patients should be reassured that theircondition is not degenerative nor life-threatening, and that a variety of treatments areavailable. Mind-body therapies such as acupuncture, meditation, and yoga have shownbeneﬁt in some patients with ﬁbromyalgia and should also be considered.
IX-35. The answer is C.   (Chap. 318)   Ankylosing spondylitis is a chronic disease that progresses
to complete ankylosis over the course of several decades in a minority of individuals withthis disease. Poor prognostic factors that are associated with an increased risk of progres-sion include earlier onset of disease, male sex, and involvement of the hip joints. Spinalfracture is the most serious complication, with even minor trauma increasing the risk offracture in the rigid spine. Spinal cord injury is a dreaded complication of spinal fracture.The estimate lifetime risk of spinal fracture in AS is >10%. An important component toprevent disability is to maintain a healthy weight and an exercise program with the goal ofmaintaining posture and range of motion in the spine. In addition to an exercise program,use of NSAIDs reduces pain and tenderness and increases mobility. When individuals whoused NSAIDs daily regardless of pain symptoms were compared to a group of individualswho used NSAIDs only when pain was more severe, those with daily use of NSAIDs hadless radiographic progression of their disease. Anti-TNF-α  therapy (inﬂiximab, etaner-
cept, adalimumab) has a rapid and dramatic effect in AS, but these drugs are not ﬁrst-linetherapy at the present time because the effects of long-term use are unknown. However,there can be remarkable improvement in mobility and bone mineral density once TNF- α
inhibitors are initiated.
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 369
IX-36. The answer is A.   (Chap. 313)   SLE is a chronic disease that has relapses and remissions,
but is without cure. In individuals without major organ involvement, therapy can be di-
rected at suppression of symptoms. This patient’s limiting symptoms are due to articularinvolvement of SLE. Hydroxychloroquine was developed as an antimalarial drug and hasbeen demonstrated to result in signiﬁcant improvement in arthritis, dermatitis, and fatiguein SLE. Further, there is evidence that hydroxychloroquine reduces the number of diseaseﬂares, and this drug is often ﬁrst-line therapy for treatment of joint and skin symptoms inSLE. Acetaminophen may be prescribed to control joint pain but is often less effective.While nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are often effective, caution shouldbe used when prescribing these medications because there is an increased risk of NSAID-induced aseptic meningitis in SLE patients. Further, NSAIDs may also worsen hypertensionand cause renal disease. Quinacrine is another antimalarial drug that may be substituted forhydroxychloroquine, but it is considered second-line therapy due to its side effect of causingdiffuse yellowish skin discoloration. Physical therapy may be appropriate in combinationwith anti-inﬂammatory medications but is not expected to signiﬁcantly improve the pa-tient’s functioning without control of the underlying disease. Prednisone is a potent anti-inﬂammatory medication that would be effective in suppressing the patient’s symptoms.However, high-dose therapy (0.5–1.0 mg/kg daily) is not indicated in mild disease unlessthe patient is refractory to conservative therapies or develops major organ involvement, asthe beneﬁts in this situation would not outweigh the side effects. Methotrexate is often use-ful for joint symptoms as well as systemic manifestations, if prednisone therapy cannot besafely decreased or if the patient develops intolerable side effects of less toxic medications.
IX-37. The answer is E.   (Chap. 319)   This patient most likely has polyarteritis nodosa with a
symptom complex consisting of abdominal pain, weight loss, hypertension, and mono-neuritis. Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is an uncommon vasculitis that affects primarily me-dium-size arteries without the involvement of venules. There are no diagnostic serologictests for PAN. Up to 30% of patients with PAN are positive for hepatitis B surface antigen.In cases of PAN associated with hepatitis B, the virus, IgM, and complement can be dem-onstrated in vessel walls on biopsy. In light of the patient’s past history of injection druguse, the presence of hepatitis B should be evaluated. However, demonstration of hepatitisB surface antigen is not diagnostic of PAN. ANCA is rarely positive in PAN patients, andhepatitis C is associated with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis but not with PAN. With the pa-tient’s abdominal pain that is worsened with eating, mesenteric ischemia caused by vas-culitis should be considered. On mesenteric angiography, one would expect to ﬁndaneurysmal dilatation of the arteries. Again, however, this is not pathognomonic forPAN. The most deﬁnitive way to diagnose PAN is by ﬁnding vasculitis on a biopsy of theaffected nerve. Therefore, a radial nerve biopsy should be pursued.
IX-38. The answer is E.   (Chap. 311)   Allergic rhinitis is a common problem in the United States
and North America. It is estimated that ~1 in 5 individuals experiences allergic rhinitis. Theincidence is greatest in childhood and adolescence, and the symptoms tend to regress withaging. Complete remissions, however, are uncommon. Many individuals experience seasonalsymptoms only. These symptoms are due to pollen production by weeds, grasses, and treesthat are dependent upon wind currents, rather than insects, for cross-pollination. The timingof the pollination events predicts seasonal severity of symptoms and varies little from year toyear within a particular locale. Based on this pattern, one is able to predict which allergens aremost likely responsible for a patient’s symptoms. In the temperate regions of North America,trees pollinate in the spring, and ragweed pollinates in the fall. Grasses are responsible for sea-sonal allergic symptoms in the summer months. Mold allergens can have a variable pattern ofsymptoms, depending upon climactic conditions that allow them to sporulate. Perennial rhi-nitis does not have a seasonal pattern and is more continually present. Allergens that causeperennial rhinitis include animal dander, dust, and cockroach-derived proteins.
IX-39. The answer is A.   (Chap. 331)   This patient has a classic presentation for olecranon bursi-
tis, with warmth, swelling, ﬂuctuance, and tenderness over the posterior aspect of the el-bow. Most often this is due to repeated trauma or pressure to the area that can occur
370 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
through leaning on the elbow or through immobility with continuous pressure. Alterna-
tively, infections, generally with gram-positive organisms, can cause olecranon bursitis, andcrystalline disease, especially monosodium urate, can cause this picture. Initial evaluationinvolves aspiration of the ﬂuid for Gram stain, culture, cell count and differential, and crys-tal evaluation. Empirical antibiotics would be warranted in this patient because of concernfor infection with fevers and systemic illness. Incision and drainage should be reserved forbursitis of infectious etiology that is not responding to antibiotics and repeated aspirations.
IX-40. The answer is C.   (Chap. 16)   In a patient with back pain, any symptoms of pain at rest
or pain not associated with speciﬁc postures should raise suspicion for a serious underly-ing cause, such as fracture, infection, or spinal tumors. The examination includes inspec-tion of the lower spine, the surrounding musculature, and both hips. Straight leg raisingis performed with the patient lying ﬂat with passive ﬂexion of the extended leg at the hip,which stretches L5, S1, and the sciatic nerve. Flexion of up to 80° is normal. A positivemaneuver occurs if the patient’s usual pain is reproduced. This maneuver may also beperformed in the sitting position to determine if the pain is indeed reproducible. Thecrossed straight leg raising sign is positive when ﬂexion of one leg reproduces the pain inthe opposite leg or buttocks. This sign is less sensitive than straight leg raising, but it ismore speciﬁc for disk herniation. The nerve or nerve root lesion is always on the side ofthe pain. The reverse straight leg raising maneuver is performed by having the patientstand next to the examination table and passively extend each leg. This stretches the L2–L4 nerve roots and the femoral nerve.
IX-41. The answer is A.   (Chap. 319)   Cyclophosphamide in combination with glucocorticoids
has increased the survival in Wegener’s granulomatosis from 5% at 5 years to >70%. However,cyclophosphamide is a cytotoxic alkylating agent that has serious side effects that limit itslong-term use. The incidence of cystitis at doses of 2 mg/kg daily is at least 30%, with a con-comitant incidence of bladder cancer of at least 6%. For this reason, patients are instructed totake cyclophosphamide in the morning with large volumes of water. Frequent urinalyses areperformed to assess for development of microscopic hematuria. In addition, there are signiﬁ-cant bone marrow effects, including bone marrow suppression and development of chromo-somal abnormalities, that may lead to myelodysplasia. Most clinicians monitor completeblood counts at least monthly. Infertility with gonadal suppression may occur during treat-ment, and the effects of cyclophosphamide can result in permanent infertility in both menand women. Other side effects of cyclophosphamide at the usual doses for vasculitis includegastrointestinal intolerance, hypogammaglobulinemia, pulmonary ﬁbrosis, and oncogenesis.Alopecia, however, is unusual at the doses for chronic administration.
IX-42. The answer is C.   (Chap. 309)   The human major histocompatibility complex genes are
located on a 4-megabase region on chromosome 6. The major function of the MHCcomplex genes is to produce proteins that are important in developing immunologicspeciﬁcity through their role in binding antigen for presentation to T cells. This process isnonspeciﬁc, and the ability of an HLA molecule to bind to a particular protein dependsupon the molecular ﬁt between the amino acid sequence of a particular protein and thecorresponding domain on the MCH molecule. Once a peptide has bound, the MHC-peptide complex binds to the T cell receptor, after which the T cell must determine if animmune response should be generated. If an antigen is similar to an endogenous protein,the potential antigen will be recognized as a self-peptide and tolerance to the antigen willbe continued. The MHC I and II complexes have been implicated in the development ofmany autoimmune diseases, which occur when T cells fail to recognize a peptide as a self-peptide and an immune response is allowed to develop. MHC I and II genes also play amajor role in tissue compatibility for transplantation and are important in generatingimmune-mediated rejection. The other options listed as answers refer to functions of im-munoglobulins. The variable region of the immunoglobulin is a B cell–speciﬁc responseto an antigen to promote neutralization of the antigen through agglutination and precip-itation. The constant region of the immunoglobulin is able to nonspeciﬁcally activate theimmune system through complement activation and promotion of phagocytosis by neu-trophils and macrophages.
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 371
IX-43. The answer is B.   (Chap. 331)   Inﬂammation of the abductor pollicis longus and the ex-
tensor pollicis brevis at the radial styloid process tendon sheath is known as DeQuer-
vain’s tenosynovitis. Repetitive twisting of the wrist can lead to this condition. Painoccurs when grasping with the thumb and can extend radially along the wrist to the ra-dial styloid process. Mothers often develop this tenosynovitis by holding their babies withthe thumb outstretched. The Finkelstein sign is positive in DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis. Itis positive if the patient develops pain by placing the thumb in the palm, closing the ﬁn-gers around the thumb and deviating the wrist in the ulnar direction. Management ofDeQuervain’s tenosynovitis includes nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs and splint-ing. Glucocorticoid injections can be effective. A Phalen maneuver is used to diagnosecarpal tunnel syndrome and does not elicit pain. The wrists are ﬂexed for 60 s to com-press the median nerve to elicit numbness, burning, or tingling. Gouty arthritis willpresent with an acutely inﬂamed joint with crystal-laden ﬂuid. Rheumatoid arthritis is asystemic illness with characteristic joint synovitis and radiographic features.
IX-44. The answer is C.   (Chap. 319)   Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) is a small-vessel vasculi-
tis associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) of the perinucleartype. MPA was recognized as a discrete entity in 1992, when it was distinguished frompolyarteritis nodosa because of the involvement primarily of small vessels. Twelve percentof cases present primarily with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. MPA is distinct from We-gener’s granulomatosis because it does not induce granulomatous inﬂammation. Theglomerulonephritis associated with MPA is pauci-immune, showing a lack of immuno-globulin deposition. p-ANCA staining is positive in 75% of patients with MPA, with anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies being the target of the immunoﬂuorescent staining patternof the p-ANCA. Therapy begins with high-dose steroids and often requires the additionof cytotoxic therapy with cyclophosphamide. The 5-year survival rate is 74%; however,the disease tends to be chronic, with at least a 34% relapse rate.
IX-45. The answer is B.   (Chap. 325)   This patient has degenerative arthritis. His obesity pre-
disposes him to degenerative joint disease that will be worse in the large weight-bearingjoints. The physical examination ﬁndings of decreased range of motion, crepitus, andvarus deformity that is exacerbated on weight bearing are consistent with this diagnosis.The radiogram of the knee demonstrates narrowing of the joint space with osteophyteformation. Occasional effusions may be seen, especially after overuse injuries. The jointﬂuid analysis in patients with degenerative disease reveals a clear, viscous ﬂuid with awhite blood cell count less than 2000/ µL. Positively birefringent crystals on polarizing
light microscopy will be seen in pseudogout that most commonly affects the knee,whereas negatively birefringent crystals are characteristic of gout. Joint ﬂuid in these in-ﬂammatory conditions would generally have a white blood cell count of less than 50,000/mm
3 and is yellow and turbid in character. Septic arthritis presents with fevers and a very
warm and tender joint. The joint ﬂuid can have the appearance of frank pus and isopaque. The white blood cell count is usually higher than 50,000/mm
3 and can have a
positive Gram stain for organisms.
IX-46.  and.  IX-47.   The answers are A and B.   (Chap. 320)   Behçet’s syndrome is a multisystem
disorder of uncertain cause that is marked by oral and genital ulcerations and ocular in-volvement. This disorder affects males and females equally and is more common in per-sons of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, and Far Eastern descent. Approximately 50% ofthese persons have circulating autoantibodies to human oral mucosa. The clinical featuresare quite varied. The presence of recurrent aphthous ulcerations is essential for the diag-nosis. Most of these patients have primarily oral ulcerations, although genital ulcerationsare more speciﬁc for the diagnosis. The ulcers are generally painful, can be shallow ordeep, and last for1 or 2 weeks. Other skin involvement may occur, including folliculitis,erythema nodosum, and vasculitis. Eye involvement is the most dreaded complication be-cause it may progress rapidly to blindness. It often presents as panuveitis, iritis, retinalvessel occlusion, or optic neuritis. This patient also presents with superﬁcial venousthrombosis. Superﬁcial and deep venous thromboses are present in one-fourth of these
372 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
patients. Neurologic involvement occurs in up to 10%. Laboratory ﬁndings are nonspe-
ciﬁc with elevations in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and the white blood cell count.Treatment varies with the extent of the disease. Patients with mucous membrane involve-ment alone may respond to topical steroids. In more serious or refractory cases, thalido-mide is effective. Other options for mucocutaneous disease include colchicines andintralesional interferon α. Ophthalmologic or neurologic involvement requires systemic
glucocorticoids and azathioprine or cyclosporine. Life span is usually normal unless neu-rologic disease is present. Ophthalmic disease frequently progresses to blindness.
IX-48. The answer is D.   (Chap. 331)   Rotator cuff tendonitis is the most common cause of
shoulder pain. The rotator cuff consists of the tendons of the supraspinatus, infraspina-tus, subscapularis, and teres minor muscles. It inserts on the humeral tuberosities. Thesupraspinatus tendon is most frequently involved, likely due to the impingement that canoccur between the humeral head and the acromion and coracoacromial ligament. Ab-duction of the arm causes a decrease in blood supply to this tendon, likely increasing thesupraspinatus tendon’s susceptibility to inﬂammation as well. Patients over 40 are partic-ularly susceptible to rotator cuff injury, and pain is often worse at night. Nonsteroidalanti-inﬂammatory drugs, glucocorticoid injection, and physical therapy are all ﬁrst-linemanagement strategies for rotator cuff tendonitis. Bicipital tendonitis is produced byfriction on the tendon of the long head of the biceps as it passes through the bicipitalgroove. Patients experience anterior shoulder pain that radiates down the biceps to theforearm. The bicipital groove is painful to palpation.
IX-49. The answer is D.   (Chap. 318)   This patient shows the typical features of psoriatic ar-
thritis. Five to 10% of patients with psoriasis will develop an arthritis associated with therash. In 60 to 70% of cases, the rash precedes the diagnosis. However, another 15 to 20%of patients will have joint complaints as the presenting symptom of their psoriasis. Thedisease typically begins in the fourth or ﬁfth decade of life. Psoriatic arthritis has variedjoint presentations with ﬁve commonly described patterns of joint involvement: (1) ar-thritis of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints, (2) asymmetric oligoarthritis, (3) sym-metric polyarthritis similar to rheumatoid arthritis (RA), (4) axial involvement, and(5) arthritis mutilans with the typical “pencil in cup” deformity seen on hand radiogra-phy. Erosive joint disease ultimately develops in almost all these patients, and most ofthem become disabled. Nail changes are prominent in 90% of patients with psoriatic ar-thritis. Changes that are frequently seen include pitting, horizontal ridging, onycholysis,yellowish discoloration of the nail margins, and dystrophic hyperkeratosis. The diagnosisof psoriatic arthritis is primarily clinical. Thus, in patients with joint symptoms that pre-cede the onset of rash, the diagnosis is frequently missed until dermatologic or nailchanges develop. A family history of psoriasis is important to ascertain in any patientwith an undiagnosed inﬂammatory polyarthropathy. The differential diagnosis of DIParthritis is short; only osteoarthritis and gout are commonly seen in these joints. Radiog-raphy may show typical changes, particularly in patients with arthritis mutilans. Treat-ment is directed at both the rash and the joint disease simultaneously. Anti-TNF-αtherapy has recently been shown to be helpful for both dermatologic and joint manifesta-tions of disease. Other treatments include methotrexate, sulfasalazine, cyclosporine, reti-noic acid derivatives, and psoralen plus ultraviolet light.
IX-50. The answer is C.   (Chap. 321)   Relapsing polychondritis is frequently a disease of abrupt
onset with inﬂammation of one or more cartilaginous sites. Systemic symptoms such asfever and fatigue may precede the overt inﬂammation. The peak age of onset is in the for-ties to ﬁfties, but it may occur at all ages. Approximately 30% of patients will have an-other rheumatologic disorder, most commonly systemic vasculitis. Auricular chondritisis the most common clinical manifestation of relapsing polychondritis, occurring 43% ofthe time as the presenting complaint, and with 89% cumulative frequency. Reduced hear-ing can occur in up to 40% of patients. Arthritis is a presenting complaint in 32% of pa-tients. Saddle-nose deformity, perhaps a well-known, or “classic,” sign associated withrelapsing polychondritis, is a presenting complaint of only 11% of patients and has a cu-
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 373
mulative frequency of 25%. Aortic regurgitation, due to dilation of the aortic ring or de-
struction of the cusps, is an uncommon ﬁnding in this illness, occurring in ≤5% of cases.
The diagnosis of relapsing polychondritis is based on recognition of the characteristicclinical features, including two or more separate sites of cartilaginous inﬂammation thatresponded to treatment with prednisone or dapsone. Biopsy can conﬁrm the diagnosisbut may not be necessary if the clinical features are typical. 
IX-51. The answer is B.   (Chap. 317)   Sjögren’s syndrome is associated with a lifetime risk of
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of 5% that usually presents later in the illness. The primarynon-Hodgkin’s lymphoma associated with Sjögren’s syndrome is a low-grade, marginalzone B cell lymphoma that usually presents extranodally. Many instances are found in-cidentally on labial biopsy. Persistent parotid enlargement, leukopenia, cryoglobulin-emia, and presence of rheumatoid factor should prompt evaluation for possiblelymphoma. Treatment for Sjögren’s syndrome should be same as that for other B cellnon-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. Factors that inﬂuence survival include size >7 cm, pres-ence of B symptoms, and high or intermediate histologic grade. Adenoid cystic carci-noma is the second most common malignant tumor of the salivary glands aftermucoepidermoid carcinoma, but it does not occur more commonly in Sjögren’s syn-drome. An impacted sialolith could cause unilateral enlargement of the parotid glandbut should present with pain with palpation. A sialolith may be complicated by bacte-rial sialadenitis. Pain is worse with eating or the anticipation of eating, which wouldstimulate saliva production. Mumps is unusual in the United States today due to immu-nization. Mumps most commonly presents with associated fever and systemic symp-toms. Recurrent vasculitis would also be likely to present with systemic symptoms.Salivary glands are unlikely to be affected by vasculitis.
IX-52. The answer is B.   (Chap. 320)   Behçet’s syndrome is a multisystem inﬂammatory disease
of unknown etiology that presents with recurrent oral and genital ulcerations. The ulcer-ations are generally painful, occur in groups, and subside spontaneously in 1–2 weekswithout leaving scars. Diagnosis of Behçet’s syndrome is made based on clinical charac-teristics. The diagnosis requires the presence of recurrent oral ulcers plus two of the fol-lowing criteria: recurrent genital ulcers, eye lesions, skin lesions (including erythemanodosum), or positive pathergy test. A pathergy test is considered positive when nonspe-ciﬁc skin inﬂammation develops 2–3 days after a scratch or injection of sterile saline. Thisis manifested as a small 2- to 3-mm papule at the site of injection. Other clinical manifes-tations of Behçet’s syndrome include nonerosive arthritis, gastrointestinal ulcerations,and neurologic involvement. In addition, individuals with Behçet’s syndrome are at in-creased risk of venous thromboembolic disease. The cause of Behçet’s syndrome is un-known. It is more common in individuals from the Mediterranean region, Middle East,and Far East. In advanced disease, antibodies to α-enolase of endothelial cells and Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae  have been shown. The pathologic lesion is perivasculitis with neu-
trophilic inﬁltration, endothelial swelling, and ﬁbrinoid necrosis. Oral and genital lesionscan usually be treated with topical glucocorticoids alone. Other treatments that are effec-tive include thalidomide, colchicine, and systemic glucocorticoids. For central nervoussystem disease, azathioprine is added to systemic glucocorticoids. The severity of the dis-ease tends to abate over time, and lifespan in Behçet’s disease is normal. Development of10 mm of dermal induration with overlying erythema occurring 49–72 h after injectionof an antigenic protein is typical of a type IV hypersensitivity reaction. The most com-mon use of this reaction is to assess for infection with tuberculosis after injection of a pu-riﬁed protein derivative to Mycobacterium tuberculosis . The Kveim reaction refers to the
development of granulomatous inﬂammation 4–6 weeks after injection of a protein de-rived from the lesion of sarcoidosis. An urticarial reaction demonstrates immediate hy-persensitivity reaction and is typical of allergy phenomena.
IX-53. The answer is C.   (Chap. 313)   This patient is presenting with acute lupus nephritis with
evidence of hematuria, proteinuria, and an acute rise in creatinine. T ogether with infec-tion, nephritis is the most common cause of mortality in the ﬁrst decade after diagnosis
374 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
of SLE and warrants prompt immunosuppressive therapy. It is important to assess for
other potentially reversible causes of acute renal insufﬁciency, but this patient is not oth-erwise acutely ill and is taking no medications that would cause renal failure. The urinal-ysis shows evidence of active nephritis with hematuria and proteinuria. Even in theabsence of RBC casts, therapy should not be withheld to await biopsy results in someonewith a known diagnosis of SLE with consistent clinical presentation and urinary ﬁndings.This patient also has other risk factors known to predict the development of lupus ne-phritis, including high titers of anti-dsDNA and African-American race. The mainstay oftreatment for any life-threatening or organ-threatening manifestation of SLE is high-dose systemic glucocorticoids. Addition of cytotoxic or other immunosuppressive agents(cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil) is recommended to treat seri-ous complications of SLE, but their effects are delayed for 3–6 weeks after initiation oftherapy, whereas the effects of glucocorticoids begin within 24 h. Thus, these agents aloneshould not be used to treat acute serious manifestations of SLE. The choice of cytotoxicagent is at the discretion of the treating physician. Cyclophosphamide in combinationwith steroid therapy has been demonstrated to prevent development of end-stage renaldisease better than steroids alone. Likewise, mycophenolate also prevents development ofend-stage renal disease in combination with glucocorticoids, and some studies suggestthat African Americans have a greater response to mycophenolate than to cyclophospha-mide. Plasmapheresis is not indicated in the treatment of lupus nephritis but is useful incases of severe hemolytic anemia or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura associatedwith SLE. Finally, this patient has no acute indication for hemodialysis and, with treat-ment, may recover renal function.
IX-54. The answer is D.   (Chap. 314)   Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multisystem disease with-
out a known etiology. Genetic factors appear to explain ~60% of disease susceptibility.The hallmark, or characteristic feature, of RA is persistent, inﬂammatory synovitis. Theprevalence of RA is 0.8% in the general population, and women are affected three timesmore often than men. About 10% of patients will have a ﬁrst-degree relative with the dis-ease. 80% of patients will develop the disease between the ages of 35 and 50. The diseasecourse can be variable between patients; some patients experience minimal joint damage,while others have a relentless and debilitating polyarthritis.
IX-55. The answer is D.   (Chap. 314)   Felty’s syndrome is a syndrome of chronic RA, spleno-
megaly, and neutropenia. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are also sometimes related. Pa-tients who develop Felty’s syndrome most commonly have more active disease with hightiters of rheumatoid factor, subcutaneous nodules, and other systemic manifestations ofdisease. However, Felty’s syndrome can develop when joint inﬂammation has regressed.The leukopenia is a selective neutropenia with polymorphonuclear leukocytes below1500/mm
3. Bone marrow biopsy reveals hypercellularity with a lack of mature neutro-
phils. Hypersplenism has been proposed as a cause of Felty’s syndrome, but splenectomydoes not consistently correct the abnormality. Excessive margination of granulocytescaused by antibodies to these cells, complement activation, or binding of immune com-plexes may contribute to neutropenia.
IX-56. The answer is A.   (Chap. 318)   Anterior uveitis occurs in up to 30% of AS patients and
may antedate the onset of the spondylitis. Attacks usually occur unilaterally with pain,photophobia, and blurred vision. Recurrent attacks are common, and ultimately cata-racts may result. Other commonly seen problems include inﬂammation in the colon andileum in up to 60% of AS patients, but only rarely do these patients develop inﬂamma-tory bowel disease. Cardiac disease is present in only a few percent of these patients andmost commonly presents as aortic regurgitation. Other cardiac manifestations includecomplete heart block and congestive heart failure. Rare complications are upper lobe pul-monary ﬁbrosis and retroperitoneal ﬁbrosis.
IX-57. The answer is C.   (Chap. 383)   This patient presents with the classic symptoms, signs,
and laboratory ﬁndings of polymyositis (PM) with antisynthetase antibodies. The differ-ential diagnosis for a patient with proximal muscle weakness includes inclusion-body
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 375
myositis, viral infections, denervating conditions such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS), metabolic myopathies such as acid maltase deﬁciency, endocrine myopathies suchas hypothyroidism, paraneoplastic myopathy, and drug-induced myopathies such as 
D-
penicillamine, procainamide, statins, and glucocorticoids. PM is associated with an ele-vated creatine kinase, electromyography (EMG) showing irritability, and biopsy showingT cell inﬁltrates primarily in the muscle fascicles. Many patients with PM have autoanti-bodies targeted against the ribonucleoproteins involved in protein synthesis (antisyn-thetases). The antibody directed against histidyl-transfer RNA synthetase or anti-Jo-1identiﬁes a group of patients with PM who have a high likelihood (80%) of having inter-stitial lung disease. Antiglomerular antibodies are found in patients with Goodpasture’ssyndrome, antihistone antibodies in those with drug-induced lupus, and antimicrosomalantibodies in those with autoimmune hepatitis.
IX-58. The answer is E.   (Chap. 326)   Osteoarthritis (OA) is a disease of joint failure due to
joint stress and vulnerability. As the primary driving force of the disease is mechanical,ﬁrst-line therapy should be nonpharmacologic. Avoiding activities that cause pain andoverload the joint, strengthening and conditioning the adjacent muscle groups, and sup-porting or unloading the joint with a brace or crutch are all examples of fundamentaltreatments aimed at reversing the pathophysiology of OA. In the case above, weight lossshould be the primary goal of therapy. Each pound of weight increases loading across aweight-bearing joint three- to six-fold. This patient would beneﬁt from a daily minimal-weight-bearing exercise regimen combined with nutritional goals aimed at slow, consis-tent weight loss. Avoidance of walking is impractical; a cane or supportive device to lessenthe joint load can be offered. Steroids and narcotics are not indicated in this case.
IX-59. The answer is E.   (Chap. 329)   Fibromyalgia is characterized by chronic widespread
musculoskeletal pain, stiffness, paresthesia, disturbed sleep, and easy fatigability. It oc-curs in a 9:1 female to male ratio. It is not conﬁned to any particular region, ethnicity, orclimate. While the pathogenesis is not clear, there are associations with disturbed sleep(disruption of stage 4 sleep) and abnormal pain perception. Fibromyalgia is diagnosed bythe presence of widespread pain, a history of widespread musculoskeletal pain that hasbeen present for >3 months, and pain on palpation at 11 of 18 tender point sites. Besidespain on palpation, the neurologic and musculoskeletal examinations are normal in pa-tients with ﬁbromyalgia. Psychiatric illnesses, particularly depression and anxiety disor-ders, are common comorbidities in these patients but do not help satisfy any diagnosticcriteria. 
IX-60. The answer is B.   (Chap. 317)   Sjögren’s syndrome may present in patients as a primary
disease or as a secondary disease in association with other autoimmune disorders, such asrheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, mixed connective tis-sue disease, and primary biliary cirrhosis. This patient is typical in that most persons af-fected by this disorder are middle-aged females with a female-to-male ratio of 9:1.Symptoms are related to diminished lacrimal and salivary gland function. Oral dryness,or xerostomia, is very common. Parotid enlargement occurs in 66% of these patients. Oc-ular involvement resulting in symptoms of a sandy or gritty feeling under the eyelids,burning, redness, itching, decreased tearing, and photosensitivity is due to destruction ofcorneal and bulbar conjunctival epithelium, deﬁned as keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Diag-nostic evaluation includes the measurement of tear ﬂow by Schirmer’s test. Slit-lamp ex-amination of the cornea after rose Bengal staining may show punctate corneal ulcerationsand attached ﬁlaments of corneal epithelium. The most common extranodal manifesta-tion of Sjögren’s syndrome is arthralgias or arthritis (up to 60% of patients). Autoanti-bodies to Ro/SSA or La/SSB are very suggestive of this syndrome and are part of theclassiﬁcation criteria. Rheumatoid arthritis may be considered; however, the examinationdid not demonstrate inﬂammation, and the diffuse joint complaints without persistentmorning stiffness make this less likely. Vitamin A deﬁciency may lead to dry eye but doesnot explain the patient’s other symptoms.
376 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
IX-61. The answer is D.   (Chap. 314)   There are no blood tests that are speciﬁc for diagnosing
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Rheumatoid factors, which are autoantibodies to the Fc por-
tion of IgG, have been used to help with diagnosis, and can be found in two-thirds of pa-tients with RA. In the general population, rheumatoid factors become more prevalentwith age, and 10–20% of patients older than 65 will have them. In unselected individuals,the predictive value of a positive rheumatoid factor is poor; no more than one-third ofthose with rheumatoid factors will have RA. False-positive results can occur in patientswith systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, chronic liver disease, sarcoido-sis, hepatitis B, mononucleosis, tuberculosis, malaria, and a host of other conditions. Re-cently, antibodies to cyclic citrullinated polypeptides (anti-CCP) have been shown to behelpful in diagnosing RA. In early RA, anti-CCP has been shown to be more predictive ofdisease than rheumatoid factor. Anti-CCP is felt to be a more speciﬁc test, and is positivein 1.5% of healthy individuals. The ESR has been used for decades as a nonspeciﬁcmarker of inﬂammation. It is elevated in virtually all patients with active RA. In the pa-tient above, radiographs would not add anything to the diagnostic evaluation. In earlydisease they are no more revealing of active synovitis than a careful physical examination.
IX-62. The answer is A.   (Chap. 311)   This patient presents with perennial allergic rhinitis with
multiple factors that are likely contributing to the persistent symptoms. Her skin testingshows multiple sensitivities including ragweed, grass, pet dander, and dust mites. The ini-tial step in the treatment of chronic perennial rhinitis is avoidance of the offending aller-gens. This should include removal of the pet from the home, which is often difﬁcult giventhe emotional attachment to the pet. In this instance, the ﬁrst approach to the patient’ssensitivity to cat dander is to discuss potentially removing the pet from the home. In ad-dition, multiple other interventions are available that might decrease her symptoms.Other avoidance strategies that would decrease her exposure to offending allergens in-clude removal of carpet and drapes from the bedroom, weekly laundering of the beddingand clothes at high temperatures, use of a ﬁlter-equipped vacuum, and plastic-lined cov-ers for the mattress, pillows, and comforters. In addition, air-ﬁltration devices can de-crease the concentration of air-borne allergens. The medical therapy of perennial rhinitisshould include use of H
1 antihistamines, which the patient is currently prescribed. α-Ad-
renergic agents can also be utilized for short periods to decrease congestion, but their useis limited by the development of rebound vasodilatation and worsening nasal congestion.Intranasal glucocorticoids are the most potent drugs for alleviating the symptoms of al-TABLE IX-61 The 1987 Revised Criteria for the Classiﬁcation of RA
1. Guidelines for classiﬁcation
a. Four of seven criteria are required to classify a patient as having rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
b. Patients with two or more clinical diagnoses are not excluded.
2. Criteriaa
a. Morning stiffness: Stiffness in and around the joints lasting 1 h before maximal improve-
ment.
b. Arthritis of three or more joint areas: At least three joint areas, observed by a physician si-
multaneously, have soft tissue swelling or joint effusions, not just bony overgrowth. The 14 possible joint areas involved are right or left proximal interphalangeal, metacarpophalan-
geal, wrist, elbow, knee, ankle, and metatarsophalangeal joints.
c. Arthritis of hand joints: Arthritis of wrist, metacarpophalangeal joint, or proximal inter-
phalangeal joint.
d. Symmetric arthritis: Simultaneous involvement of the same joint areas on both sides of 
the body.
e. Rheumatoid nodules: Subcutaneous nodules over bony prominences, extensor surfaces, or 
juxtaarticular regions observed by a physician.
f. Serum rheumatoid factor: Demonstration of abnormal amounts of serum rheumatoid fac-
tor by any method for which the result has been positive in less than 5% of normal control subjects.
g. Radiographic changes: Typical changes of RA on posteroanterior hand and wrist radio-
graphs that must include erosions or unequivocal bony decalcification localized in or most marked adjacent to the involved joints.
aCriteria a–d must be present for at least 6 weeks. Criteria b–e must be observed by a physician.
Source:  From Arnett et al.
IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS 377
lergic rhinitis and should be considered in this case. Other agents with efﬁcacy in treating
perennial rhinitis include montelukast and intranasal cromolyn sodium. Immunother-apy may be considered if these interventions fail to work. Immunotherapy (previouslycalled hyposensitization) involves weekly subcutaneous injections of gradually increasingconcentrations of the suspected offending allergen. Studies have demonstrated partial re-lief of symptoms, but the injections must be continued for 3–5 years. Immunotherapy isalso considered contraindicated in this patient because of the use of beta blockers, whichcould interfere with treatment of anaphylaxis, a rare side effect of immunotherapy.
IX-63. The answer is C.   (Chap. 314)   Rheumatoid arthritis is chronic, symmetric inﬂammatory
polyarthritis. In two-thirds of patients, an initial clinical presentation of fatigue, anorexia,and weakness precedes joint complaints. In established RA (i.e., in a patient known to bediagnosed with this disorder), the most common manifestation is pain in affected jointsthat is worsened by movement. Morning stiffness of an hour or more is very frequent inthese patients as well, but it is worth noting that this clinical ﬁnding does not allow differ-entiation between inﬂammatory and noninﬂammatory arthritides. Arthritic pain comesfrom the joint capsule itself, which is innervated and very sensitive to distention. 10% ofpatients with RA will have a ﬁrst-degree relative with the disease. Weight loss is a nonspe-ciﬁc symptom and is not deﬁnitively associated with active disease.
IX-64. The answer is D.   (Chap. 318)   This patient presents with low back pain with morning
stiffness and evidence of sacroiliitis on plain radiograph. The most likely diagnosis isankylosing spondylitis (AS). Some 90% of individuals diagnosed with AS are HLA-B27positive. However, HLA-B27 is present in 7% of North American Caucasian individualsand thus is not speciﬁc for the diagnosis of AS. Only 1–6% of individuals with HLA-B27antigen will develop AS. AS is a spondyloarthropathy that usually presents with a dull lowback and gluteal pain. There is a male predominance (2–3:1) with a median age at pre-sentation of 23 years. The main joints involved are those of the axial skeleton. About 20–30% will have arthritis of the hips or shoulders, and asymmetric polyarthritis of the smalljoints occurs in 25–35%. On physical examination, pain with palpation is present overthe affected joints. There is decrease ﬂexion and extension of the spine, and decreasedchest expansion (<5 cm) may be seen with inspiration. Radiographically, sacroiliitis isdemonstrated by blurring of the cortical margins of the subchondral bone with progres-sion to bony erosions and sclerosis. In the lumbar spine, there is progressive loss of lum-bar lordosis. Laboratory testing frequently shows HLA-B27 positivity as stated previously.C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate may be elevated. Anemia is alsocommon. An elevation in alkaline phosphatase may be seen in severe disease, but this isnot common. Anti-CCP antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, and rheumatoid factor arelargely absent unless caused by a coexistent disease.
IX-65. The answer is B.   (Chap. 318)   The presence of arthritis after episodes of infectious diar-
rhea or urethritis has been recognized for centuries, with the symptoms of diarrhea ordysuria occurring 1 to 4 weeks before the onset of the arthritis. The most common organ-isms that are implicated are bacteria that cause acute infectious diarrhea. All four Shigella
species have been reported to cause reactive arthritis, although S. ﬂexneri is only rarely im-
plicated. Other bacteria that have been identiﬁed as triggers include several Salmonella
species, Yersinia enterocolitica, andCampylobacter jejuni. In addition, some organisms that
cause urethritis are also causative; these include Chlamydia trachomatis and Ureaplasma
urealyticum. Arthritis associated with disseminated gonococcal infection is directly relatedto an infectious cause and responds to antibiotics, unlike reactive arthritis.
IX-66. The answer is D.   (Chap. 327)   In acute gouty arthritis, the initial therapy is directed
against the intense inﬂammatory response. Typical agents include colchicine, nonster-oidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and oral glucocorticoids. The choice of agentshould be made in the context of the patient’s comorbid conditions and medications aswell as potential side effects of the medication. Oral glucocorticoids are the treatment ofchoice for this patient. These medications, such as prednisone, are highly effective, andthere are no contraindications to the use of prednisone. Colchicine may be poorly toler-
378 IX. R HEUMATOLOGY AND  IMMUNOLOGY  — ANSWERS
ated in the elderly. In addition, renal disease and blood dyscrasias are relative contraindi-
cations to the use of the colchicine. Colchicine is usually administered orally as 0.6-mgtablets, which may be taken every 6 h until the appearance of intolerance or gastrointesti-nal side effects. Intravenous colchicine is rarely used except in hospitalized individualswho are unable to take oral medications. Sudden death with IV administration has beenreported as well as marked bone marrow suppression, and thus this medication shouldnot be used in this individual. NSAIDs, such as indomethacin in full anti-inﬂammatorydoses, are effective in ~90% of individuals with acute gout, with resolution of symptomsin 5–8 days. The most effective drugs are indomethacin, ibuprofen, or diclofenac. How-ever, given the degree of renal impairment in this patient, NSAIDs should not be used.Hypouricemic agents such as allopurinol and probenecid should not be used in acutegouty arthritis as they may worsen the acute attack. Probenecid is a uricosuric agent thatis also contraindicated in this patient because of the underlying renal disease.
IX-67. The answer is D.   (Chap. 317)   Lymphoma is well known to develop speciﬁcally in the
late stage of Sjögren’s syndrome. Common manifestations of this malignant condition in-clude persistent parotid gland enlargement, purpura, leukopenia, cryoglobulinemia, andlow C4 complement levels. Most of the lymphomas are extranodal, marginal zone B cell,and low-grade. Low-grade lymphomas may be detected incidentally during a labial bi-opsy. Mortality is higher in patients with concurrent B symptoms (fevers, night sweats,and weight loss), a lymph node mass >7 cm, and a high or intermediate histologic grade.
IX-68. The answer is D.   (Chap. 315)   This patient has a history very suggestive of recurrent
bouts of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) with evidence of mitral regurgitation, mitral steno-sis, and aortic regurgitation on physical examination. This and the presence of atrial ﬁ-brillation imply severe rheumatic heart disease. Risk factors for this condition includepoverty and crowded living conditions. As a result, ARF is considerably more common inthe developing world. Daily aspirin is the treatment of choice for the migratory large-joint arthritis and fever that are common manifestations of ARF. Practitioners sometimesuse steroids during acute bouts of carditis to quell inﬂammation, though this remains acontroversial practice and has no role between ﬂares of ARF. Secondary prophylaxis witheither daily oral penicillin or, preferably, monthly IM injections is considered the bestmethod to prevent further episodes of ARF, and therefore prevent further valvular dam-age. Primary prophylaxis with penicillin on an as-needed basis is equally effective for pre-venting further bouts of carditis. However, most episodes of sore throat are too minor forpatients to present to a physician. Therefore, secondary prophylaxis is considered prefer-able in patients who already have severe valvular disease. Doxycycline is not a ﬁrst-lineagent for group A Streptococcus , the pathogen that incites ARF.
379X. ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
X-1.   What is the most common cause of hypothyroidism
worldwide?
A. Autoimmune disease
B. Graves’ diseaseC. Iatrogenic causesD. Iodine deﬁciencyE. Medication side effects
X-2.   A 23-year-old woman presents to clinic complaining
of months of weight gain, fatigue, amenorrhea, and wors-ening acne. She cannot identify when her symptoms be-gan precisely, but she reports that without a change in herdiet she has noted a 12.3-kg weight gain over the past 6months. She has been amenorrheic for several months.On examination she is noted to have truncal obesity withbilateral purplish striae across both ﬂanks. Cushing’s syn-drome is suspected. Which of the following tests shouldbe used to make the diagnosis?
A. 24-h urine free cortisol
B. Basal adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)C. Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) level at 8 
A.M.
D. Inferior petrosal venous samplingE. Overnight 1 mg  dexamethasone suppression test
X-3.   Secretion of gonadotropin releasing-hormone (GnRH)
normally stimulates release of luteinizing hormone (LH)and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) which promoteproduction and release of testosterone and estrogen.Which mechanism below best explains how long-actinggonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (e.g., leupro-lide) decrease testosterone levels in the management ofprostate cancer?
A. GnRH agonists also promote production of sex hor-
mone–binding globulin, which decreases the avail-
ability of testosterone
B. Negative feedback loop between GnRH and LH/FSHC. Sensitivity of LH and FSH to pulse frequency of GnRHD. Translocation of the cytoplasmic nuclear receptor
into the nucleus with constitutive activation ofGnRHX-4.   A 44-year-old woman seeks evaluation for irregular
menstrual cycles with heavy menstrual bleeding. She re-ports that her menses had been regular with 28-day cyclessince her early twenties. However, for the past 6 months,her cycles have been 22–25 days with heavy associatedbleeding that is unusual for her. She has had rare hotﬂashes and sleep disturbance. She is requesting assistancein controlling these symptoms. Y ou suspect she is peri-menopausal, and hormonal testing on day 2 of hermenses conﬁrms this suspicion. Y ou are consideringtreatment with oral contraceptives for control of hersymptoms and to protect against unintended pregnancy.All of the following would be considered contraindica-tions to use of oral contraceptive pills except
A. breast cancer
B. cigarette smokingC. kidney diseaseD. liver diseaseE. prior history of deep venous thrombosis
X-5.   All the following are risk factors for the development
of osteoporotic fractures except
A. African-American raceB. current cigarette smokingC. female sexD. low body weightE. physical inactivity
X-6.   All the following drugs are associated with an in-
creased risk of osteoporosis in adults except
A. cyclosporineB. dilantinC. heparinD. prednisoneE. ranitidine
X-7.   A 34-year-old woman presents to your clinic with a va-
riety of complaints that have been worsening over the pastyear or so. She notes fatigue, amenorrhea, and weightgain. She states that her primary physician diagnosed her
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
380 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
with hypothyroidism several months ago, and she has
been faithfully taking thyroid hormone replacement. Herthyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) has been in the nor-mal range over the last two laboratory checks. When hersymptoms did not improve on synthroid, she was sentto your clinic for further evaluation. A diagnosis of pan-hypopituitarism is considered. All of the following areconsistent with normal pituitary function except
A. basal elevation of follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) in a post-menopausal woman
B. elevation of aldosterone after infusion of cosyntropinC. elevation of growth hormone after ingestion of a
glucose load
D. elevation of cortisol after injection of regular insulinE. elevation of TSH after infusion of thyrotropin-
releasing hormone (TRH)
X-8.   A 33-year-old male with end-stage renal disease who is
on hemodialysis complains of decreased libido, inabilityto maintain erections, increasing fatigue, and mild weak-ness. He has been on a stable hemodialysis regimen for 8years, and all his electrolytes are normal. Further evalua-tion reveals a reduced serum testosterone level. Measure-ment of which of the following will distinguish primaryfrom secondary hypogonadism?
A. Aldosterone
B. CortisolC. EstradiolD. Luteinizing hormoneE. Thyroid-stimulating hormone
X-9.   A 42-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
room by ambulance for altered mental status. The glu-cose level by ﬁngerstick monitoring was below the mea-surement capabilities of the monitor (<40 mg/dL). After2 ampules of 50% dextrose, the patient’s ﬁngerstick glu-cose remains at 42 mg/dL. She remains unconscious andhad a 1-min seizure while in transport. She has no historyof diabetes mellitus. Her family denies that she has beenrecently ill, but recently she has been depressed. Sheworks as a registered nurse on a medical ﬂoor of the hos-pital. Which of the following tests would conﬁrm anoverdose of exogenous insulin?
A. Plasma glucose <55 mg/dL, plasma insulin >18
pmol/L, and plasma C-peptide levels undetectable
B. Plasma glucose <55 mg/dL, plasma insulin >18
pmol/L, and plasma C-peptide levels >0.6 ng/mL
C. Plasma glucose <55 mg/dL, plasma insulin <18
pmol/L, and plasma glucagon <12 pmol/L
D. Plasma glucose <55 mg/dL, plasma insulin <18
pmol/L, and C-peptide levels undetectable
X-10.   A 44-year-old male is involved in a motor vehicle col-
lision. He sustains multiple injuries to the face, chest, andpelvis. He is unresponsive in the ﬁeld and is intubated for
airway protection. An intravenous line is placed. The pa-tient is admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) withmultiple orthopedic injuries. He is stabilized medicallyand on hospital day 2 undergoes successful open reduc-tion and internal ﬁxation of the right femur and right hu-merus. After his return to the ICU, you review hislaboratory values. TSH is 0.3 mU/L, and the total T
4 level
is normal. T 3 is 0.6 µg/dL. What is the most appropriate
next management step?
A. Initiation of levothyroxine
B. A radioiodine uptake scanC. A thyroid ultrasoundD. ObservationE. Initiation of prednisone
X-11.   All the following biochemical markers are a measure
of bone resorption except
A. serum alkaline phosphatase
B. serum cross-linked N-telopeptideC. serum cross-linked C-telopeptideD. urine hydroxyprolineE. urine total free deoxypyridinoline
X-12.   A 54-year-old woman is referred to endocrinology
for evaluation of osteoporosis after a recent evaluation ofback pain revealed a compression fracture of the T4 ver-tebral body. She is perimenopausal with irregular men-strual periods and frequent hot ﬂashes. She does notsmoke. She otherwise is well and healthy. Her weight is 70kg, and height is 168 cm. A bone mineral density scanshows a T-score of –3.5 SD and a Z-score of –2.5 SD. Allof the following tests are indicated for the evaluation ofosteoporosis in this patient except
A. 24-h urine calciumB. follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hor-
mone levels
C. serum calciumD. renal function panelE. vitamin D levels (25-hydroxyvitamin D)
X-13.   A 67-year-old woman presents to clinic after a fall
on the ice a week ago. She visited the local emergencyroom immediately after the fall, where hip radiographswere performed and were negative for fracture or dislo-cation. They did reveal fusion of the sacroiliac joints andcoarse trabeculations in the ilium, consistent with Pagetdisease. A comprehensive metabolic panel was also sentat that visit and is remarkable for an alkaline phospha-tase of 157 U/L, with normal serum calcium and phos-phate levels. She was discharged with analgesics and toldto follow up with her primary care doctor for furthermanagement of her radiographic ﬁndings. She is recov-ering from her fall and denies any long-standing pain orimmobility of her hip joints. She states that her fatherX-10. (Continued) X-7. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 381
suffered from a bone disease that caused him headaches
and hearing loss near the end of his life. She is very con-cerned about the radiographs and wants to know whatthey mean. Which of the following is the best treatmentstrategy at this point?
A. Initiate physical therapy and non-weight bearing ex-
ercises to strengthen the hip.
B. No treatment; she is asymptomatic. Follow radio-
graphs and laboratory ﬁndings every 6 months.
C. Prescribe vitamin D and calcium.
D. Start an oral bisphosphonate.E. Start high-dose prednisone with rapid taper over 1
week.
X-14.   A 26-year-old woman presents with 2 weeks of nau-
sea, vomiting, and jaundice. She has been previouslyhealthy and has no past medical history. On examination,a palpable liver edge is appreciated. Ocular ﬁndings arepresented in Figure X-14 (Color Atlas). Her transaminasesand total bilirubin are elevated. Which of the followingtests will lead to a deﬁnitive diagnosis in this patient?
A. Anti-smooth-muscle antibody
B. Hepatitis B surface antigenC. Liver biopsy with quantitative copper assayD. Serum ceruloplasminE. T otal iron-binding capacity and ferritin
X-15.   A 29-year-old woman presents to your clinic com-
plaining of difﬁculty swallowing, sore throat, and tenderswelling in her neck. She has also noted fevers intermit-tently over the past week. Several weeks prior to her cur-rent symptoms she experienced symptoms of an upperrespiratory tract infection. She has no past medical his-tory. On physical examination, she is noted to have asmall goiter that is painful to the touch. Her oropharynxis clear. Laboratory studies are sent, and reveal a whiteblood cell count of 14,100 cells/µL with a normal differ-ential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 53 mm/h,and a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 21 µΙU/mL.
Thyroid antibodies are negative. What is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Autoimmune hypothyroidism
B. Cat-scratch feverC. Graves’ diseaseD. Ludwig’s anginaE. Subacute thyroiditis
X-16.   What is the most appropriate treatment for the pa-
tient described above?
A. Iodine ablation of the thyroid
B. Large doses of aspirinC. Local radiation therapyD. No treatment necessaryE. PropylthiouracilX-17.    The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)
provided deﬁnitive proof that reduction in chronic hyper-glycemia
A. improves microvascular complications in type 1 di-
abetes mellitus
B. improves macrovascular complications in type 1 di-
abetes mellitus
C. improves microvascular complications in type 2 di-
abetes mellitus
D. improves macrovascular complications in type 2 di-
abetes mellitus
E. improves both microvascular and macrovascular
complications in type 2 diabetes mellitus
X-18.    A 54-year-old woman undergoes thyroidectomy for
follicular carcinoma of the thyroid. About 6 h after sur-
gery, the patient complains of tingling around her mouth.She subsequently develops a pins-and-needles sensationin the ﬁngers and toes. The nurse calls the physician tothe bedside to evaluate the patient after she has severehand cramps when her blood pressure is taken. Uponevaluation, the patient is still complaining of intermittentcramping of her hands. Since surgery, she has receivedmorphine sulfate, 2 mg, for pain and compazine, 5 mg,for nausea. She has had no change in her vital signs and isafebrile. Tapping on the inferior portion of the zygomaticarch 2 cm anterior to the ear produces twitching at thecorner of the mouth. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showsa QT interval of 575 ms. What is the next step in evalua-tion and treatment of this patient?
A. Administration of benztropine, 2 mg IV
B. Administration of calcium gluconate, 2 g IVC. Administration of magnesium sulphate, 4 g IVD. Measurement of calcium, magnesium, phosphate,
and potassium levels
E. Measurement of forced vital capacity
X-19.    A 49-year-old male is brought to the hospital by his
family because of confusion and dehydration. The fam-ily reports that for the last 3 weeks he has had persistentcopious watery diarrhea that has not abated with the useof over-the-counter medications. The diarrhea has beenunrelated to food intake and has persisted during fast-ing. The stool does not appear fatty and is not malodor-ous. The patient works as an attorney, is a vegetarian,and has not traveled recently. No one in the householdhas had similar symptoms. Before the onset of diarrhea,he had mild anorexia and a 5-lb weight loss. Since thediarrhea began, he has lost at least 10 pounds. The phys-ical examination is notable for blood pressure of 100/70,heart rate of 110/min, and temperature of 36.8°C(98.2°F). Other than poor skin turgor, confusion, anddiffuse muscle weakness, the physical examination isunremarkable. Laboratory studies are notable for a nor-mal complete blood count and the following chemistryresults:X-13. (Continued)
382 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
A 24-h stool collection yields 3 L of tea-colored stool.
Stool sodium is 50 meq/L, potassium is 25 meq/L, and
stool osmolality is 170 mosmol/L. Which of the followingdiagnostic tests is most likely to yield the correct diagnosis?
A. Serum cortisol
B Serum TSHC. Serum VIPD. Urinary 5-HIAAE. Urinary metanephrine
X-20.   A 68-year-old woman with stage IIIB squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung is admitted to the hospital becauseof altered mental status and dehydration. Upon admis-sion, she is found to have a calcium level of 19.6 mg/dLand phosphate of 1.8 mg/dL. Concomitant measurementof parathyroid hormone was 0.1 pg/mL (normal 10–65pg/mL), and a screen for parathyroid hormone–relatedpeptide was positive. Over the ﬁrst 24 h, the patient re-ceives 4 L of normal saline with furosemide diuresis. Thenext morning, the patient’s calcium is now 17.6 mg/dLand phosphate is 2.2 mg/dL. She continues to have delir-ium. What is the best approach for ongoing treatment ofthis patient’s hypercalcemia?
A. Continue therapy with large-volume ﬂuid adminis-
tration and forced diuresis with furosemide.
B. Continue therapy with large-volume ﬂuid adminis-
tration, but stop furosemide and treat with hydro-
chlorothiazide.
C. Initiate therapy with calcitonin alone.D. Initiate therapy with pamidronate alone.E. Initiate therapy with calcitonin and pamidronate.
X-21.   Differentiating primary dysmenorrhea from other causes
of chronic cyclical pelvic pain is important because there is aspeciﬁc treatment for primary dysmenorrhea. What is thepathophysiology/treatment for primary dysmenorrhea?
A. Ectopic endometrium/oral contraceptives
B. History of sexual abuse/counselingC. Increased stores of prostaglandin precursors/anti-
inﬂammatory medication
D. Ruptured graaﬁan follicle/oral contraceptives
X-22.   A 25-year-old female notes increasing facial hair and
acne for the last 4 months. She has noticed some deepen-ing of her voice but denies changes in her libido or genita-lia. She weighs 94 kg and is 5 feet 5 inches tall. Bloodpressure is 126/70 mmHg. Examination is notable formoderate obesity. There is no evidence of abdominalstriae or bruising. All the following would be importantinitial steps in the clinical assessment of this patient except
A. medication historyB. family historyC. serum testosterone levelD. serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levelE. abdominal ultrasound
X-23.   A patient visited a local emergency room 1 week ago
with a headache. She received a head MRI, which did notreveal a cause for her symptoms, but the ﬁnal report states“an empty sella is noted. Advise clinical correlation.” Thepatient was discharged from the emergency room with in-structions to follow-up with her primary care physician assoon as possible. Her headache has resolved, and the pa-tient has no complaints; however, she comes to your ofﬁce1 day later very concerned about this unexpected MRIﬁnding. What should be the next step in her management?
A. Diagnose her with subclinical pan-hypopituitarism,
and initiate low-dose hormone replacement.
B. Reassure her and follow laboratory results closely.
C. Reassure her and repeat MRI in 6 months.D. This may represent early endocrine malignancy—
whole-body positron-emission tomography/CT isindicated.
E. This MRI ﬁnding likely represents the presence of a be-
nign adenoma—refer to neurosurgery for resection.
X-24.   A 16-year-old previously healthy teenage boy pre-
sents to the local emergency room with a headache thathas been worsening over the course of 2 months. His par-ents note that “he just hasn’t seemed like himself,” andover the past 2 weeks has been complaining of double vi-sion. He experienced profuse vomiting this afternoon,which prompted his visit. He also describes weight gainover the same 2 month time period and has not beensleeping well. On examination, he is drowsy, and fundu-scopic examination reveals papilledema. He has no fever,neck stiffness, or elevated white blood cell count. Whichof the following is the most likely cause?
A. Carney syndrome
B. Congenital pan-hypopituitarismC. CraniopharyngiomaD. McCune-Albright syndromeE. Meningioma
X-25.   At the midpoint of the menstrual cycle, a luteinizing
hormone (LH) surge occurs via an estrogen-mediatedpathway. Though chronic low levels of estrogen are inhib-itory to LH release, gradually rising estrogen levels stimu-late LH secretion. This relationship between estrogen andLH is an example of which endocrine regulatory system?
A. Autocrine regulation
B. Negative feedback controlNa
+146 meq/L
K+3.0 meq/L
Cl–96 meq/L
HCO 3–36 meq/L
BUN 32 mg/dL
Creatinine 1.2 mg/dLX-19. (Continued) X-22. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 383
C. Paracrine regulation
D. Positive feedback control
X-26.   Which of the following is the most common site for a
fracture associated with osteoporosis?
A. Femur
B. HipC. RadiusD. VertebraE. Wrist
X-27.   Postmenopausal estrogen therapy has been shown to
increase a female’s risk of all the following clinical out-comes except
A. breast cancer
B. hip fractureC. myocardial infarctionD. strokeE. venous thromboembolism
X-28.   All the following therapies have been shown to re-
duce the risk of hip fractures in postmenopausal womenwith osteoporosis except
A. alendronateB. estrogenC. parathyroid hormoneD. raloxifeneE. risedronateF. vitamin D plus calcium
X-29.    A 45-year-old man is diagnosed with pheochromo-
cytoma after presentation with confusion, marked hyper-tension to 250/140 mmHg, tachycardia, headaches, andﬂushing. His fractionated plasma metanephrines show anormetanephrine level of 560 pg/mL and a metaneph-rine level of 198 pg/mL (normal values: normetaneph-rine: 18–111 pg/mL; metanephrine: 12–60 pg/mL). CTscanning of the abdomen with IV contrast demonstratesa 3-cm mass in the right adrenal gland. A brain MRI withgadolinium shows edema of the white matter near theparietooccipital junction consistent with reversible pos-terior leukoencephalopathy. Y ou are asked to consult re-garding management. Which of the following statementsis true regarding management of pheochromocytoma isthis individual?
A. Beta-blockade is absolutely contraindicated for tachy-
cardia even after adequate alpha-blockade has been
attained.
B. Immediate surgical removal of the mass is indicated,
because the patient presented with hypertensive cri-sis with encephalopathy.
C. Salt and ﬂuid intake should be restricted to prevent
further exacerbation of the patient’s hypertension.
D. Treatment with phenoxybenzamine should be started
at a high dose (20–30 mg three times daily) to rap-idly control blood pressure, and surgery can be un-dertaken within 24–48 h.
E. Treatment with IV phentolamine is indicated for
treatment of the hypertensive crisis. Phenoxyben-zamine should be started at a low dose and titratedto the maximum tolerated dose over 2–3 weeks. Sur-gery should not be planned until the blood pressureis consistently below 160/100 mmHg.
X-30.    Inhibition of renin activity is a contemporary target
mechanism for treatment of hypertension. All of the fol-lowing physiologic alterations will cause an increase in re-nin secretion except
A. decreased effective circulating blood volumeB. high-potassium dietC. increased sympathetic activityD. low solute delivery to the distal convoluted tubulesE. upright posture
X-31.    Which of the following represents the likelihood of
ﬁnding a pituitary microadenoma at autopsy in the gen-eral population?
A. 0.1%
B. 2%C. 5%D. 11%E. 25%
X-32.    A 33-year-old woman presents to the emergency room
complaining of headache, palpitations, sweating, and anxi-ety. These feelings began abruptly about 30 min ago, and shereports intermittent symptoms similar to these that occurperhaps once per month. She has previously been diagnosedwith panic attacks and has been prescribed paroxetine 20mg daily. Her symptoms have not improved since initiationof this drug, and she believes that her episodes of palpita-tions and anxiety have worsened since this time. Her pastmedical history includes a diagnosis of hypertension, buttreatment with amlodipine has recently been discontinuedbecause her blood pressure was 88/50 mmHg with sympto-matic orthostasis at her last visit with her primary care pro-vider. Her only other medical history is headaches for thepast year for which she has been prescribed ibuprofen, 600mg as needed. She believes the headaches accompany herepisodes and last for several hours after the sweating hassubsided. On physical examination, the patient appearsﬂushed and diaphoretic. Her blood pressure while lyingdown is 170/100 mmHg with a heart rate of 90 beats/min.Upon standing her blood pressure falls to 132/74 mmHgwith a heart rate of 112 beats/min. Her respiratory rate is 22beats/min, and her temperature is 37.4°C. Her examinationis otherwise normal. There is no papilledema. Which of thefollowing is most likely to correctly diagnose this patient?
A. 24-h urine collection for 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid
(5-HIAA)X-29. (Continued) X-25. (Continued)
384 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
B. 24-h urine collection for fractionated metanephrines
C. CT scan of the abdomen with intravenous contrastD.
131I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scan (MIBG)
E. No testing is necessary; the patient is suffering from
a panic attack
X-33.   The mineralocorticoid receptor in the renal tubule is
responsible for the sodium retention and potassium wast-ing that is seen in mineralocorticoid excess states such asaldosterone-secreting tumors. However, states of gluco-corticoid excess (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome) can alsopresent with sodium retention and hypokalemia. Whatcharacteristic of the mineralocorticoid-glucocorticoidpathways explain this ﬁnding?
A. Higher afﬁnity of the mineralocorticoid receptor for
glucocorticoids
B. Oversaturation of the glucocorticoid degradation
pathway in states of glucocorticoid excess
C. Similar, but distinct, DNA binding sites producing
the same metabolic effect
D. Upregulation of the mineralocorticoid-binding pro-
tein in states of glucocorticoid excess
X-34.   A 40-year-old female with Graves’ disease was re-
cently started on methimazole. One month later she
comes to the clinic for a routine follow-up. She notessome low-grade fevers, arthralgias, and general malaise.Laboratories are notable for a mild transaminitis and aglucose of 150 mg/dL. All the following are known sideeffects of methimazole except
A. agranulocytosis
B. rashC. arthralgiaD. hepatitisE. insulin resistance
X-35.   A 60-year-old woman is referred to your ofﬁce for
evaluation of hypercalcemia of 12.9 mg/dL. This wasfound incidentally on a chemistry panel that was drawnduring a hospitalization for cervical spondylosis. Despiteﬂuid administration in the hospital, her serum calcium atdischarge was 11.8 mg/dL. The patient is asymptomatic.She is otherwise in good health and has had her recom-mended age-appropriate cancer screening. She deniesconstipation or bone pain and is now 8 weeks out fromher spinal surgery. T oday, her serum calcium level is 12.4mg/dL, and phosphate is 2.3 mg/dL. Her hematocrit andall other chemistries including creatinine were normal.What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Breast cancer
B. HyperparathyroidismC. HyperthyroidismD. Multiple myelomaE. Vitamin D intoxicationX-36.   A 62-year-old man presents to a local emergency room
complaining of chest pressure and feeling “like my heart isﬂuttering inside my chest.” He experienced similar symp-toms 1 month ago that resolved spontaneously. He did notseek medical attention at that time. He has no signiﬁcantpast medical history. On review of systems he notes somerecent weight loss and excessive sweating. He feels asthough his appetite has increased lately. His wife adds thathe has recently taken some time off work due to fatigue;despite his time off he has not been able to relax and hasnot been sleeping well. On physical examination his heartrate is irregular at 140–150 beats/minute. Blood pressure is134/55 mmHg. He is admitted to the hospital and screen-ing tests reveal an undetectable thyroid-stimulating hor-mone level. Which of the following statements is true?
A. 50% of hyperthyroid patients will convert from
atrial ﬁbrillation to normal sinus rhythm with thy-
roid management alone.
B. A ﬁrm, small thyroid on physical examination would
be compatible with a diagnosis of Graves’ disease.
C. Atrial ﬁbrillation is the most common cardiac man-
ifestation of hyperthyroidism.
D. His excessive sweating is likely not related to hyper-
thyroidism.
E. Hyperthyroidism leads to a high-output state for the
heart, and narrowing pulse pressure.
X-37.   The patient described above is started on atenolol
and his heart rate slows to 80 beats/min. Which of the fol-lowing additional therapies is indicated?
A. Diltiazem
B. ItraconazoleC. LiothyronineD. MethimazoleE. Phenoxybenzamine
X-38.   A patient presents to his primary care physician com-
plaining of fatigue and hair loss. He has gained 6.4 kgsince his last clinic visit 6 months ago but notes markedlydecreased appetite. On review of systems, he reports thathe is not sleeping well and feels cold all the time. He isstill able to enjoy his hobbies and spending time with hisfamily, and does not believe that he is depressed. His ex-amination reveals diffuse alopecia and slowed deep ten-don reﬂex relaxation. Hypothyroidism is high on thedifferential for this patient. Which of the statements re-garding that diagnosis is correct?
A. A normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) ex-
cludes secondary, but not primary hypothyroidism.
B. T
3 measurement is not indicated to make the diagnosis.
C. The T 3/T4 ratio is important for determining re-
sponse to therapy.
D. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies distinguish between
primary and secondary hypothyroidism.
E. Unbound T 4 is a better screening test than TSH for
subclinical hypothyroidism.X-32. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 385
X-39.   Which of the following statements regarding autoim-
mune hypothyroidism is true?
A. 10% of 40- to 60-year-old adults have subclinical
hypothyroidism.
B. Absence of a goiter makes autoimmune hypothy-
roidism unlikely.
C. Family history of autoimmune disorders does not
signiﬁcantly increase risk.
D. It is more common in the Paciﬁc Rim where diets
are lower in iodine.
E. Viral thyroiditis does not induce subsequent au-
toimmune thyroiditis.
X-40.   Y ou are researching a cell line with an altered mem-
brane structure that makes the cell membrane imperme-
able to extracellular molecules of all size and charge. Y outhen expose the cell line to varying concentrations of var-ious hormones. Of the following hormones, which oneshould no longer exert an effect on this cell line?
A. Dopamine
B. Gonadotropin-releasing hormoneC. InsulinD. Vitamin D
X-41.   In regard to Graves’ disease, which of the following is
true?
A. It accounts for >90% of all causes of thyrotoxicosis.
B. It occurs in 2% of women.C. It typically occurs in patients between 50 and 60
years of age.
D. Populations with a low iodine intake have an in-
creased prevalence.
E. There is an equal male-to-female prevalence.
X-42.   The parents of a 14-year-old boy want your opinion
about treatment of their child’s lipid disorder. The familyemigrated from South Africa to the United States recently.The child has had cutaneous xanthomas on the hands, el-bows, heels, and buttocks since childhood. In South Af-rica, he underwent thoracotomy for a problem with hisaortic valve 3 years ago. He currently experiences exer-tional dyspnea, and his diet consists mostly of unhealthy,fatty foods. On examination, you appreciate bruits in thefemoral arteries and abdominal aorta. His most recentlipid proﬁle shows a total cholesterol of 734 mg/dL and alow-density lipoprotein (LDL) of 376 mg/dL. What is themost appropriate step in this patient’s evaluation?
A. Genetic test for familial defective apoB100
B. Rule out congenital syphilisC. Rule out hypothyroidismD. Screen the parents for Münchhausen-by-proxy syn-
drome
X-43.    A 16-year-old male is brought to your clinic by his
parents due to concern about his weight. He has not seena physician for many years. He states that he has gainedweight due to inactivity and that he is less active becauseof exertional chest pain. He takes no medications. He wasadopted and his parents do not know the medical historyof his biologic parents. Physical examination is notablefor Stage 1 hypertension and body mass index of 30 kg/m
2. He has xanthomas on his hands, heels, and buttocks.
Laboratory testing shows a low-density lipoprotein (LDL)of 210 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL, total bilirubin of3.1 mg/dL, haptoglobin <6 mg/dL, and a glycosylated he-moglobin of 6.7%. Y ou suspect a hereditary lipoproteine-mia due to the clinical and laboratory ﬁndings. Which testwould be diagnostic of the primary lipoprotein disorderin this patient?
A. Congo red staining of xanthoma biopsy
B. CT scan of the liverC. Family pedigree analysisD. Gas chromatographyE. LDL receptor function in skin biopsy
X-44.    A 35 year-old woman presents with amenorrhea over
the past 4 months. She has been trying to get pregnantwithout success. She complains of a thin milky dischargefrom her nipples and over the past several days has notedsome blurry vision. On laboratory testing, her prolactinlevel is 110 µg/L (normal: 5–20 µg/L). A head MRI is per-
formed and reveals an 11-mm pituitary macroadenoma.What is the next step in management?
A. Follow visual ﬁelds; if worse in 1 month, refer for
surgery.
B. Reassure the patient and follow-up closely.
C. Refer for urgent neurosurgery.D. Repeat MRI in 4 months.E. Do visual ﬁeld testing and initiate a dopamine agonist.
X-45.    A patient is asked to undergo a testing protocol to as-
sess adrenocortical function. After 5 days of severe so-dium restriction (10 mmol/day), blood is drawn foranalysis. Which hormone abnormality may be detectedusing this protocol?
A. Hypercorticolism
B. Glucocorticoid deﬁciencyC. Mineralocorticoid deﬁciencyD. Mineralocorticoid excessE. Vasopressin excess
X-46.    A 38-year-old woman presents to her primary care
doctor complaining of fatigue and irritability. She thinksthese symptoms have been worsening over a period of sev-eral months. She has a history of mild intermittent asthmaand hypertriglyceridemia. Physical examination reveals aresting heart rate of 105 beats/min, blood pressure of 136/72 mmHg, bilateral proptosis and warm, moist skin.Screening tests are sent and reveal a thyroid-stimulatinghormone (TSH) level that is undetectable and a normalunbound T
4. What should be the next step in diagnosis?X-43. (Continued)
386 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
A. Radionuclide scan of the thyroid
B. Thyroid-stimulating antibody screenC. Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody screenD. T otal T
4
E. Unbound T 3
X-47.   A 24-year-old female patient returns to your ofﬁce to
review her recent laboratory data. On her last clinic visit,you began an evaluation for secondary amenorrhea. Hervital signs are normal and her body mass index (BMI) is20 kg/m
2. Her β -human chorionic gonadotropin is nega-
tive. Serum follicle-stimulation hormone (FSH) is belowthe lower limit of normal. Serum testosterone is withinnormal limits. Morning cortisol is 24 mg/dL. Urinalysis isunremarkable and there is no glucose in the urine. Thy-roid-stimulating hormone is 3.7 mU/L. Serum prolactinis elevated. What is the most likely cause of this patient’ssecondary amenorrhea?
A. Ectopic pregnancy
B. Pituitary tumorC. Primary ovarian failureD. Uterine outﬂow obstructionE. Malnutrition
X-48.   A couple seeks advice regarding infertility. The female
partner is 35 years old. She has never been pregnant andwas taking oral contraceptive pills from age 20 until age 34.It is now 16 months since she discontinued her oral contra-ceptives. She is having menstrual cycles approximatelyonce every 35 days, but occasionally will go as long as 60days between cycles. Most months, she develops breast ten-derness about 2–3 weeks after the start of her menstrual cy-cle. When she was in college, she was treated for Neisseria
gonorrhoeae that was diagnosed when she presented to the
student health center with a fever and pelvic pain. She oth-erwise has no medical history. She works about 60 h weeklyas a corporate attorney and exercises daily. She drinks cof-fee daily and alcohol at social occasions only. Her bodymass index (BMI) is 19.8 kg/m
2. Her husband, who is 39
years old, accompanies her to the evaluation. He also hasnever had children. He was married previously from theages of 24–28. He and his prior wife attempted to conceivefor about 15 months, but were unsuccessful. At that time,he was smoking marijuana on a daily basis and attributedtheir lack of success to his drug use. He has now been com-pletely free of drugs for 9 years. He suffers from hyperten-sion and is treated with lisinopril, 10 mg daily. He is notobese (BMI, 23.7 kg/m
2). They request evaluation for their
infertility and request help with conception. Which of thefollowing statements is true in regards to their infertilityand likelihood of success in conception?
A. Determination of ovulation is not necessary in the
female partner as most of her cycles occur regularly,
and she develops breast tenderness mid-cycle indic-ative of ovulationB. Lisinopril should be discontinued immediately be-
cause of the risk of birth defects associated with its use
C. The female partner should be assessed for tubal pat-
ency by a hysterosalpingogram. If signiﬁcant scar-ring is found, in vitro fertilization should bestrongly considered to decrease the risk of ectopicpregnancy.
D. The prolonged use of oral contraceptives for >10
years has increased the risk of anovulation and in-fertility
E. The use of marijuana by the male partner is directly
toxic to sperm motility, and this is the likely cause oftheir infertility.
X-49.   A 22-year-old male seeks evaluation from his primary
care doctor for gynecomastia that has developed over thepast 2 years. He states he did not enter puberty until muchlater than his friends and has only had sparse growth of fa-cial and axillary hair. He continues to have poor libido andrarely desires sexual intercourse, even though he has beenin a monogamous relationship for the past 8 months. Hisgirlfriend is increasingly frustrated by his lack of sexualdesire and also urged him to seek medical evaluation. Hehas no other medical history and was born prematurely at34 weeks’ gestation. His birth weight was 2400 g (50thpercentile). His early development was normal. During el-ementary school, he was held back in third grade becauseof learning difﬁculties and thereafter was in special educa-tional classes to assist him with reading and mathematics.He is taking no medications. On physical examination, heis 188 cm tall and has eunuchoid features. His facial, axil-lary, and genital hair is sparse. Gynecomastia is present.The testes are small, measuring 2.8 cm in length. What isthe most likely diagnosis in this patient?
A. Androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular femini-
zation)
B. Klinefelter syndrome
C. Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (45,X/46,XY mosaicism)D. T esticular dysgenesisE. True hermaphroditism
X-50.   All the following drugs may interfere with testicular
function except
A. cyclophosphamideB. ketoconazoleC. metoprololD. prednisoneE. spironolactone
X-51.   A 65-year-old man with a central left upper lobe lung
mass presents with renal stones and generalized bonepain. He is found to have a calcium level of 16.4 mg/dLwith a phosphate level of 1.2 mg/dL. A bone scan is nor-mal. Which of the following laboratory tests is most likelyto establish a diagnosis?X-48. (Continued) X-46. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 387
A. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
B. CortisolC. Magnesium levelD. Parathyroid hormone (intact PTH or PTHi)E. Parathyroid hormone–related peptide (PTHrp)
X-52.   A biopsy of the lung mass in the patient in Question
X-51 will most likely show:
A. Bronchoalveolar lung carcinoma
B. Bronchial carcinoidC. Poorly differentiated adenocarcinomaD. Small cell carcinomaE. Squamous cell carcinoma
X-53.   All the following are direct actions of parathyroid
hormone (PTH) except
A. increased calcium resorption from boneB. increased calcium resorption from the kidneyC. increased calcium resorption from the gastrointesti-
nal tract
D. increased synthesis of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin DE. decreased phosphate resorption from the kidney
X-54.   A 45-year-old Caucasian woman seeks advice from
her primary care physician regarding her risk for osteo-porosis and the need for bone density screening. She is alifelong nonsmoker and drinks alcohol only socially. Shehas a history of moderate-persistent asthma since age 12.She is currently on ﬂuticasone, 44 mg/puff twice daily,with good control currently. She last required oral pred-nisone therapy about 6 months ago when she had inﬂu-enza that was complicated by an asthma ﬂare. She tookprednisone for a total of 14 days. She has had three preg-nancies and two live births at ages 39 and 41. She cur-rently has irregular periods occurring approximatelyevery 42 days. Her follicle-stimulating hormone level is25 mIU/L and 17 β-estradiol level is 115 pg/mL on day 12
of her menstrual cycle. Her mother and maternal auntboth have been diagnosed with osteoporosis. Her motheralso has rheumatoid arthritis and requires prednisonetherapy, 5 mg daily. Her mother developed a compressionfracture of the lumbar spine at age 68. On physical exam-ination, the patient appears well and healthy. Her heightis 168 cm. Her weight is 66.4 kg. The chest, cardiac, ab-dominal, muscular, and neurologic examinations arenormal. What do you tell the patient about the need forbone density screening?
A. As she is currently perimenopausal, she should have
a bone density screen every other year until she
completes menopause and then have bone densito-metry measured yearly thereafter.
B. Because of her family history, she should initiate
bone density screening yearly beginning now.
C. Bone densitometry screening is not recommended
until after completion of menopause.D. Delayed childbearing until the fourth and ﬁfth de-
cade decreases her risk of developing osteoporosis
E. Her use of low-dose inhaled glucocorticoids in-
creases her risk of osteoporosis threefold, and sheshould undergo yearly bone density screening.
X-55.    A 62-year-old woman presents to your clinic com-
plaining of fatigue and lethargy over a period of 6months. She cannot recall exactly when these symptomsstarted, but feels that they are worsening with time. Shedescribes dry skin and has noted that she is losing hair.On examination she is mildly bradycardic at 52 beats/minwith normal blood pressure and has dry, coarse skin.There are areas of alopecia and mild lower extremityedema is noted. Which of the following is the most likelyclinical diagnosis and which test would be indicated forscreening for the diagnosis?
A. Hyperthyroidism: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
B. Hyperthyroidism: unbound T
4
C. Hypothyroidism: TSHD. Hypothyroidism: unbound T
4
X-56.    A 55-year-old male is admitted to the intensive care
unit with 1 week of fever and cough. He was well until 1week before admission, when he noted progressive short-ness of breath, cough, and productive sputum. On theday of admission the patient was noted by his wife to belethargic and unresponsive. 911 was called, and the pa-tient was intubated in the ﬁeld and then brought to theemergency department. His medications include insulin.The past medical history is notable for alcohol abuse, dia-betes mellitus, and chronic renal insufﬁciency. T empera-ture is 38.9°C (102°F). He is hypotensive with a bloodpressure of 76/40 mmHg. Oxygen saturation is 86% onroom air. On examination, the patient is sedated and in-tubated. Jugular venous pressure is normal. There are de-creased breath sounds at the right lung base withegophony. Heart sounds are normal. The abdomen issoft. There is no peripheral edema. Chest radiographyshows a right lower lobe inﬁltrate with a moderate pleuraleffusion. An electrocardiogram is normal. Sputum Gramstain shows gram-positive diplococci. White blood cellcount is 23 × 10
3/µL, with 70% polymorphonuclear cells
and 6% bands. Blood urea nitrogen is 80 mg/dL, and cre-atinine is 6.1 mg/dL. Plasma glucose is 425 mg/dL. He isstarted on broad-spectrum antibiotics, intravenous ﬂu-ids, omeprazole, and an insulin drip. A nasogastric tube isinserted, and tube feedings are started. On hospital day 2plasma phosphate is 1.0 mg/dL. All of following arecauses of hypophosphatemia except
A. sepsisB. renal failureC. insulinD. alcoholismE. malnutritionX-54. (Continued) X-51. (Continued)
388 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
X-57.   A 50-year-old male presents to the clinic for a routine
health examination. A comprehensive metabolic panel
shows a serum calcium level of 11.2 mg/dL. Serum phos-phate is 3.0 mg/dL. Serum creatinine is normal. He de-nies bone pain, lethargy, weakness, or weight loss. What isthe most common cause of hypercalcemia in outpatients?
A. Malignancy
B. MedicationsC. Milk-alkali syndromeD. Primary hyperparathyroidismE. Granulomatous disease
X-58.   All of the following would be indicated in the work-
up of infertility except
A. endometrial biopsyB. hysterosalpingogramC. measurement of testosterone and dehydroepiandos-
terone  in the female partner
D. measurement of testosterone, follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) inthe male partner
E. semen analysis
X-59.   Y ou are asked to see a 15-year-old African-American girl
because of anovulation. She has never experienced menarche,and her mother is concerned since most women in her familyexperience menarche around 13 years of age. The patient hasprominent nipples and the areola are part of the breast. Pubichair is dark, curly, and coarse and is abundant in the pubicarea and inner thigh. There is no facial hair, and muscular de-velopment is age and sex appropriate. She does have cyclicalpelvic pain. What is the next step in her evaluation?
A. Examination with a speculum
B. MRI of the abdomen and pelvisC. Serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)D. Serum prolactin
X-60.    A 21-year-old patient presents to the emergency room
with several days of severe nausea and vomiting. His room-mate noted that he hadn’t been able to keep down solidfoods and that his eyes and skin have taken on a “yellow” ap-pearance. The patient has no past medical history and de-nies alcohol or substance abuse. He takes no medications.He is admitted to the hospital for further management. Onexamination he is ill-appearing and jaundiced. The liveredge is palpable and he has mild abdominal tenderness. Hehas a normal neurologic examination. His total bilirubin is2.0 mg/dL (normal range 0.1–1.2 mg/dL) and AST is 86 U/L(normal range 0–37 U/L). His prothrombin time is normal.Viral hepatitis serologies are all negative. A liver biopsy andquantitative copper assay are performed and the patient issubsequently diagnosed with Wilson disease. Which of thefollowing is the most appropriate treatment for this patient?
A. Dimercaprol
B. Immediate liver transplantC. PenicillamineD. Trientine and liver transplant evaluationE. Zinc
X-61.   The World Health Organization (WHO) recently de-
ﬁned osteoporosis operationally as
A. a patient with a bone density less than the mean of
age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
B. a patient with a bone density less than 1.0 standard
deviation (SD) below the mean of race-and gender-
matched controls
C. a patient with a bone density less than 1.0 SD below
the mean of age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
D. a patient with a bone density less than 2.5 SD below
the mean of race-and gender-matched controls
E. a patient with a bone density less than 2.5 SD below
the mean of age-, race-, and gender-matched controls
X-62.   A 54-year-old man has been hospitalized following a
myocardial infarction. He has a history of hypertension,hypertriglyceridemia, obesity, mild renal insufﬁciencyand diet-controlled diabetes. His condition is improving,and on the third day of admission his serum urate is ele-vated at 8.8 mg/dL. He denies any joint complaints andcannot recall ever having symptoms compatible withgout. His serum creatinine is 1.5 mg/dL, which is close tohis baseline over the past 3 years. In regard to this pa-tient’s hyperuricemia, which of the following is true?
A. >70% of hospitalized patients will have increased
serum urate levels.
B. His hyperuricemia is unrelated to his heart disease.
C. His renal disease is likely caused by his increased se-
rum urate levels.
D. No treatment is needed.E. This patient should be discharged on low-dose allo-
purinol.
X-63.   A 25-year-old female visits her primary care physi-
cian after 3 years of intermittent abdominal pain, periph-eral neuropathy, and increasing episodes of anxiety andhallucinations. The physician suspects acute intermittentporphyria. She can make this diagnosis by doing which ofthe following tests?
A. Sunlight administration with observation for rash
B. Urine porphobilinogen (PBG) level during an attackC. Peripheral blood testing for an HFE C282Y mutationD. Urine PBG level when the patient is wellE. Hypoglycemic provocation testing
X-64.   All the following are side effects of HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitors (statins) except
A. hepatitisB. myopathyC. dyspepsiaD. headacheE. pulmonary ﬁbrosisX-60. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 389
X-65.   Which of the following is consistent with a diagnosis
of subacute thyroiditis?
A. A 38-year-old female with a 2-week history of a
painful thyroid, elevated T 4, elevated T 3, low TSH,
and an elevated radioactive iodine uptake scan
B. A 42-year-old male with a history of a painful thy-
roid 4 months ago, fatigue, malaise, low free T 4, low
T3, and elevated TSH.
C. A 31-year-old female with a painless enlarged thy-
roid, low TSH, elevated T 4, elevated free T 4, and an
elevated radioiodine uptake scan
D. A 50-year-old male with a painful thyroid, slightly
elevated T 4, normal TSH, and an ultrasound show-
ing a mass
E. A 46-year-old female with 3 weeks of fatigue, low T 4,
low T 3, and low TSH
X-66.   All of the following statements regarding hypoglyce-
mia in diabetes mellitus are true except
A. Individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus experience less
hypoglycemia than those with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
B. Recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia predispose to
the development of autonomic failure with defective
glucose counterregulation and hypoglycemia un-awareness.
C. The average person with type 1 diabetes mellitus has
two episodes of symptomatic hypoglycemia weekly.
D. Thiazolidinediones and metformin cause hypogly-
cemia more frequently than sulfonylureas.
E. From 2–4% of deaths in type 1 diabetes mellitus are
directly attributable to hypoglycemia.
X-67.   Which of the following forms of contraception have
theoretical efﬁcacy of >90%?
A. Condoms
B. Intrauterine devicesC. Oral contraceptivesD. SpermicidesE. All of the above 
X-68.   A patient is seen in the clinic for follow-up of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Her hemoglobin A
1C has been poorly
controlled at 9.4% recently. The patient can be counseledto expect all the following improvements with improvedglycemic control except
A. decreased microalbuminuriaB. decreased risk of nephropathyC. decreased risk of neuropathyD. decreased risk of peripheral vascular diseaseE. decreased risk of retinopathy
X-69.   A healthy 53-year-old man comes to your ofﬁce for
an annual physical examination. He has no complaintsand has no signiﬁcant medical history. He is taking anover-the-counter multivitamin and no other medicines.On physical examination he is noted to have a nontenderthyroid nodule. His thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)level is checked and is found to be low. What is the nextstep in his evaluation?
A. Close follow-up and measure TSH in 6 months
B. Fine-needle aspirationC. Low-dose thyroid replacementD. Positron emission tomography followed by surgeryE. Radionuclide thyroid scan
X-70.   During a routine checkup, a 67-year-old male is
found to have a level of serum alkaline phosphatase threetimes the upper limit of normal. Serum calcium and phos-phorus concentrations and liver function test results arenormal. He is asymptomatic. The most likely diagnosis is
A. metastatic bone disease
B. primary hyperparathyroidismC. occult plasmacytomaD. Paget’s disease of boneE. osteomalacia
X-71.   A 78-year-old man presents to your clinic and de-
scribes headaches and back pain. These have been chroniccomplaints, and he thinks they are getting worse despiteconservative management. His wife believes he is experi-encing some hearing loss. She describes how over the pastseveral months he needs to turn up the volume on thetelevision and has a difﬁcult time talking to his childrenon the telephone. Physical examination is largely unre-markable; straight leg raise is normal. Based on Rinne andWeber tests, the patient appears to have some mild senso-rineural hearing loss on the right side. A comprehensivechemistry panel shows an elevated alkaline phosphatase of170 U/L. Paget disease is now high on the differential.Which of the following is true regarding this diagnosis?
A. Family history is not predictive.
B. Hearing loss is the most common symptom.C. Nuclear medicine bone scan is required for diagnosis.D. Serum calcium and phosphate are usually abnormal.E. The pelvis, skull, and vertebrae are most commonly
affected.
X-72.   Which of the following is the most common sign of
Cushing’s syndrome?
A. Amenorrhea
B. HirsutismC. ObesityD. Purple skin striaeE. Skin hyperpigmentation
X-73.   A patient receives CT of the head as part of a “virtual
wellness physical exam” he received as a gift certiﬁcatefrom his family. A 7-mm sellar mass “most consistentwith a pituitary adenoma” is reported, and he comes toyour ofﬁce very concerned that he has a life-threateningbrain tumor. A full panel of endocrine laboratory mea-X-69. (Continued)
390 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
surements reveals no abnormalities, and besides his anxi-
ety he reports feeling quite healthy. What is the next stepin management?
A. Perform positron emission tomography/CT (PET-
CT) to evaluate for metabolic activity.
B. Reassure the patient that this ﬁnding is common
and benign; take no action.
C. Reassure and repeat laboratory measurements in 6
months.
D. Reassure and repeat head imaging in 1 year.
E. Refer to neurosurgery.
X-74.   Which of the following statements regarding hor-
mone release from the anterior pituitary is true?
A. All hormones are released in a pulsatile manner.
B. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteiniz-
ing hormone (LH) release are suppressed prior topuberty and after menopause.
C. Somatostatin acts in a feedback loop to inhibit adre-
nocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) release.
D. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is released
primarily at night.
E. With the exception of prolactin, none of the anterior
pituitary hormones are present in a fetus until week28 of gestation.
X-75.   All the following are features of lipoprotein lipase de-
ﬁciency except
A. low levels of plasma chylomicronsB. acute pancreatitisC. hepatosplenomegalyD. xanthomasE. autosomal recessive inheritance
X-76.   A 21-year-old female with a history of type 1 diabe-
tes mellitus is brought to the emergency room with nau-sea, vomiting, lethargy, and dehydration. Her mothernotes that she stopped taking insulin 1 day before pre-sentation. She is lethargic, has dry mucous membranes,and is obtunded. Blood pressure is 80/40 mmHg, andheart rate is 112 beats/min. Heart sounds are normal.Lungs are clear. The abdomen is soft, and there is no or-ganomegaly. She is responsive and oriented × 3 but dif-
fusely weak. Serum sodium is 126 meq/L, potassium is4.3 meq/L, magnesium is 1.2 meq/L, blood urea nitrogenis 76 mg/ dL, creatinine is 2.2 mg/dL, bicarbonate is 10meq/L, and chloride is 88 meq/L. Serum glucose is 720mg/dL. All the following are appropriate managementsteps except
A. arterial blood gas
B. intravenous insulinC. intravenous potassiumD. 3% sodium solutionE. intravenous ﬂuidsX-77.   All the following are effects of hypercalcemia except
A. diarrheaB. confusionC. polyuriaD. a shortened QT intervalE. nephrolithiasis
X-78.   All of the following are actions of parathyroid hor-
mone except
A. direct stimulation of osteoblasts to increase bone
formation
B. direct stimulation of osteoclasts to increase bone re-
sorption
C. increased reabsorption of calcium from the distal
tubule of the kidney
D. inhibition of phosphate reabsorption in the proxi-
mal tubule of the kidney
E. stimulation of renal 1- α-hydroxylase to produce
1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol
X-79.   Which of the following statements regarding hy-
pothyroidism is true?
A. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is the most common cause
of hypothyroidism worldwide.
B. The annual risk of developing overt clinical hy-
pothyroidism from subclinical hypothyroidism in
patients with positive thyroid peroxidase (TPO) an-tibodies is 20%.
C. Histologically, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is character-
ized by marked inﬁltration of the thyroid with acti-vated T cells and B cells.
D. A low TSH level excludes the diagnosis of hypothy-
roidism.
E. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies are present in less than
50% of patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism.
X-80.    Y ou are evaluating a patient for secondary causes of
hypertension. The patient is a 39-year-old woman who hashypertension despite using four different classes of antihy-pertensive medications, including a diuretic at therapeuticdoses. She mainly has diastolic hypertension and has beenfound to have hypokalemia on several routine bloodchemistry analyses. Y ou hold her diuretics and provide herwith potassium supplementation for 14 days, after whichyou ﬁnd the serum potassium is in the normal range. Shedenies licorice ingestion. Plasma renin activity is low. Afterdays of saline loading, aldosterone levels are elevated. A CTscan of the adrenal glands reveal no masses. An overnightdexamethasone suppression test shows no aldosteronesuppression. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Conn’s syndrome
B. Cortical nodular hyperplasiaC. Glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronismD. Liddle’s syndromeE. Renin-secreting tumorX-73. (Continued)
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS 391
X-81.   A 17-year-old woman is evaluated in your ofﬁce for
primary amenorrhea. She does not feel as if she has en-
tered puberty in that she has never had a menstrual pe-riod and has sparse axillary and pubic hair growth. Onexamination, she is noted to be 150 cm tall. She has a lowhairline and slight webbing of her neck. Her follicle-stim-ulating hormone level is 75 mIU/mL, luteinizing hor-mone is 20 mIU/mL, and estradiol level 2 pg/mL. Y oususpect Turner syndrome. All of the following tests are in-dicated in this individual except
A. buccal smear for nuclear heterochromatin (Barr
body)
B. echocardiogramC. karyotype analysisD. renal ultrasoundE. thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
X-82.   A 30-year-old male, the father of three children, has
had progressive breast enlargement during the last 6months. He does not use any drugs. Laboratory evalua-tion reveals that both LH and testosterone are low. Fur-ther evaluation of this patient should include which ofthe following?
A. Blood sampling for serum glutamic-oxaloacetic
transaminase (SGOT) and serum alkaline phospha-
tase and bilirubin levels
B. Measurement of estradiol and human chorionic go-
nadotropin (hCG) levels
C. A 24-h urine collection for the measurement of 17
ketosteroids
D. Karyotype analysis to exclude Klinefelter syndromeE. Breast biopsy
X-83.   Obesity is associated with an increased incidence of
all the following except
A. diabetes mellitus
B. cancerC. hypertensionD. biliary diseaseE. chronic obstructive lung disease
X-84.   Which of the following statements regarding Paget
disease is true?
A. 1% of patients over the age of 50 have evidence of
Paget disease.
B. A majority of patients with disease will experience
symptoms at the time of diagnosis.
C. The disease frequency has decreased over the past 20
years.
D. There is a signiﬁcant female predominance.
E. While prevalent worldwide, Paget disease is most
common in Asia.
X-85.   Which of the following statements is true about fa-
milial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH)?A. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.B. The cause is a defect in the parathyroid hormone re-
ceptor.
C. Clinical symptoms ﬁrst manifest in the third and
fourth decades of life.
D. Treatment is rarely necessary.E. Renal calcium reabsorption is more than 99%.
X-86.   Which of the following is true of Wilson disease?
A. Early diagnosis is crucial as highly effective therapy
is available.
B. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.C. Serum copper levels are usually two to three times
above normal.
D. The frequency of disease in the general population is
~1%.
E. The liver and pancreas are the most commonly af-
fected organs.
X-87.   A 48-year-old female is undergoing evaluation for
ﬂushing and diarrhea. Physical examination is normal ex-cept for nodular hepatomegaly. A CT scan of the abdo-men demonstrates multiple nodules in both lobes of theliver consistent with metastases in the liver and a 2-cmmass in the ileum. The 24-h urinary 5-HIAA excretion ismarkedly elevated. All the following treatments are ap-propriate except
A. diphenhydramineB. interferon- α
C. octreotideD. odansetronE. phenoxybenzamine
X-88.   While undergoing a physical examination during
medical student clinical skills, this patient develops severeﬂushing, wheezing, nausea, and light-headedness. Vitalsigns are notable for a blood pressure of 70/30 mmHgand a heart rate of 135/min. Which of the following is themost appropriate therapy?
A. Albuterol
B. AtropineC. EpinephrineD. HydrocortisoneE. Octreotide
X-89.   A 66-year-old Asian woman seeks treatment for osteo-
porosis. She fell and fractured her right hip, requiring a sur-gical intervention 3 months ago. She was told whilehospitalized that she had osteoporosis but had not previ-ously been evaluated for this. During the hospitalization, shedeveloped a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) with pulmo-nary embolus, for which she is currently taking warfarin. Shecompleted menopause at age 52. She is a former smoker,quitting about 6 years ago. She has always been thin, and hercurrent body mass index (BMI) is 19.2 kg/m
2. Her labora-X-85. (Continued)
392 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — QUESTIONS
tory studies show a calcium of 8.7 mg/dL, phosphate 3 mg/
dL, creatinine 0.8 mg/dL, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels of18 ng/mL (normal >30 ng/mL). A dual-energy x-ray ab-sorptiometry scan of bone mineral density has a T-score of–3.0. What is the best initial therapy for this patient?
A. Calcitonin, 200 IU intranasally daily
B. Calcium carbonate, 1200 mg, and vitamin D 400 IU
daily
C. Ethinyl estradiol, 5 µg, and medroxyprogesterone
acetate 625 mg daily
D. Raloxifene, 60 mg dailyE. Risedronate, 35 mg once weekly
X-90.   All of the following would be expected to increase
prolactin levels except
A. chest wall trauma
B. hyperthyroidismC. pregnancyD. renal failureE. sexual orgasm
X-91.    A 35-year-old male is referred to your clinic for evalu-
ation of hypercalcemia noted during a health insurancemedical screening. He has noted some fatigue, malaise,and a 4-lb weight loss over the last 2 months. He also hasnoted constipation and “heartburn.” He is occasionallynauseated after large meals and has water brash and a sourtaste in his mouth. The patient denies vomiting, dyspha-gia, or odynophagia. He also notes decreased libido and adepressed mood. Vital signs are unremarkable. Physicalexamination is notable for a clear oropharynx, no evidenceof a thyroid mass, and no lymphadenopathy. Jugularvenous pressure is normal. Heart sounds are regular withno murmurs or gallops. The chest is clear. The abdomen issoft with some mild epigastric tenderness. There is no re-bound or organomegaly. Stool is guaiac-positive. Neuro-logic examination is nonfocal. Laboratory values arenotable for a normal complete blood count. Calcium is11.2 mg/dL, phosphate is 2.1 mg/dL, and magnesium is 1.8meq/dL. Albumin is 3.7 g/dL, and total protein is 7.0 g/dL.TSH is 3 µ IU/mL, prolactin is 250 µg/L, testosterone is 620
ng/dL, and serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) isnormal. Serum intact parathyroid hormone level is 135pg/dL. In light of the patient’s abdominal discomfort andheme-positive stool, you perform an abdominal computedtomography (CT) scan that shows a lesion measuring 2 cmby 2 cm in the head of the pancreas. What is the diagnosis?
A. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1
B. MEN type 2aC. MEN type 2bD. Polyglandular autoimmune syndromeE. Von–Hippel Lindau (VHL) syndrome
X-92.   Y our 60-year-old patient with a monoclonal gam-
mopathy of unclear signiﬁcance presents for a follow-up visit and to review recent laboratory data. His cre-atinine is newly elevated to 2.0 mg/dL, potassium is 3.7mg/dL, calcium is 12.2 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein(LDL) is 202 mg/dL and triglycerides are 209 mg/dL.On further questioning he reports 3 months of swellingaround the eyes and “foamy” urine. On examination,he has anasarca. Concerned for multiple myeloma andnephrotic syndrome, you order a urine protein/creati-nine ratio, which returns at 14:1. Which treatment op-tion would be most appropriate to treat his lipidabnormalities?
A. Cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibitor
B. Dietary managementC. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitorsD. Lipid apheresisE. Niacin and ﬁbrates
X-93.   All of the following statements regarding asympto-
matic adrenal masses (incidentalomas) are true except
A. All patients with incidentalomas should be screened
for pheochromocytoma.
B. Fine-needle aspiration may distinguish between be-
nign and malignant primary adrenal tumors.
C. In patients with a history of malignancy, the likeli-
hood the mass is a metastasis is ~50%.
D. The majority of adrenal incidentalomas are non-
secretory.
E. The vast majority of adrenal incidentalomas are benign.
X-94.   Which of the following studies is most sensitive for
detecting diabetic nephropathy?
A. Serum creatinine level
B. Creatinine clearanceC. Urine albuminD. Glucose tolerance testE. Ultrasonography
X-95.   A 28-year-old woman seeks counseling before getting
pregnant. She had a brother who died at age 9 of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, and she is a known carrier of the ge-netic defect. She has no signiﬁcant past medical history,and her husband has no signiﬁcant family history. Whichof the following statements is true?
A. Her children have no risk of disease since she is not
symptomatic.
B. Her husband should be screened for carrying the ge-
netic defect of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
C. If she has a daughter, the child has a 50% chance of
being a carrier.
D. If she has an affected son, starting him on allopuri-
nol from birth will prevent clinical manifestations of
disease.
E. She should start taking allopurinol to decrease her
risk of gout and urate nephropathy.X-92. (Continued) X-89. (Continued)
393X. ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM
ANSWERS
X-1. The answer is D.   (Chap. 335)   The thyroid produces two related hormones, T 3 and T 4.
These hormones act on nuclear receptors inside cells to regulate differentiation during
development and maintain metabolic homeostasis in virtually all human cells. T 4 is se-
creted in excess of T 3 from the thyroid and both are protein-bound in the plasma. Pro-
tein binding delays hormone clearance. Unbound protein appears to be morebiologically active. T
4 is converted to more active T 3 in peripheral tissues. Two thyroid
hormone receptors are bound to speciﬁc DNA sequences; when activated by thyroidhormone, these receptors can act to up-regulate or down-regulate gene transcription. Io-dide uptake by the thyroid is the critical ﬁrst step of thyroid hormone synthesis. Dietaryiodine deﬁciency leads to decreased production of thyroid hormone and represents themost common cause of hypothyroidism worldwide. In areas of iodine sufﬁciency, au-toimmune disease such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and iatrogenic causes are the mostcommon etiologies for hypothyroidism. Paradoxically, chronic iodine excess can alsocause goiter and hypothyroidism via unclear mechanisms. This is the mechanism for thehypothyroidism that occurs in up to 13% of patients taking amiodarone. Graves’ diseaseleads to hyperthyroidism.
X-2. The answer is A.   (Chap. 333)   The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome relies on documen-
tation of endogenous hypercortisolism. Of the list above, the most cost-effective and pre-cise test is the 24-h urine free cortisol. Failure to suppress plasma 
A.M. cortisol after
overnight suppression with 1 mg dexamethasone is an alternative. Most ACTH-secretingpituitary adenomas are <5 mm in diameter and approximately half are not detected evenwith sensitive MRI. Further, because incidental microadenomas are common in the pitu-itary, the presence of a small pituitary abnormality on MRI may not establish the sourceof ACTH production. Basal plasma ACTH levels are used to distinguish between ACTH-independent (adrenal or exogenous glucocorticoid) and ACTH-dependent (pituitary, ec-topic ACTH) sources of hypercortisolism. Mean basal ACTH levels are higher in patientswith ectopic ACTH production than in patients with pituitary ACTH adenomas. There issigniﬁcant overlap in ACTH levels, however, and this test should not be used as an initialdiagnostic test. Rarely, patients have Cushing’s syndrome and elevated ACTH due to aCRH-releasing tumor. In this case, CRH levels are elevated. Inferior petrosal venous sam-pling can be used to identify a pituitary source of ACTH secretion when imaging modali-ties do not reveal a source.
X-3. The answer is C.   (Chap. 332)   Intermittent pulses of GnRH are necessary to maintain
pituitary sensitivity to the hormone. Continuous exposure to GnRH causes pituitary go-nadotrope desensitization, which ultimately leads to decreased levels of testosterone. Therelationship between GnRH and LH/FSH is a positive feedback loop where GnRH causessecretion of LH and FSH. Receptor translocation from the cytoplasm into the nucleusoccurs with certain hormones (e.g., glucocorticoid); however, this receptor phenomenonis not speciﬁc to any regulatory mechanism. GnRH does not promote production of sexhormone binding globulin. Moreover, although binding globulins can decrease theamount of bound hormone measured in the serum, abnormal levels of binding globu-lins usually do not have any clinical signiﬁcance because the free hormone levels usuallyincrease.
394 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
X-4. The answer is C.   (Chap. 342)   Perimenopause refers to the time period prior to meno-
pause during which menstrual cycles become increasingly irregular and fertility wanes.
This period usually lasts for 2–8 years before ﬁnal menses and menopause. In peri-menopause, the interval between menses typically declines by about 3 days because ofacceleration of the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle. Measurement of hormonelevels in the perimenopausal period can be difﬁcult to interpret because hormone lev-els are “irregularly irregular.”  Measurement of follicle-stimulating hormone during theearly follicular phase (days 2–5) of the menstrual cycle can rule out perimenopause ifthe levels are very low, while high levels are suggestive of the perimenopausal state.Perimenopause is generally a hyperestrogenic state, and there is an increased risk of en-dometrial carcinoma, uterine polyps, and leiomyoma during this period. Because ofthese risks, low-dose oral contraceptive pills are commonly used during perimeno-pause. Use of oral contraceptives is also important because the risk of unintended preg-nancy in this period rivals that of adolescence. However, the risks of oral contraceptivesneed to be weighed against the increased risk of thrombosis and breast cancer. Contra-indications to the use of oral contraceptives are breast cancer, cigarette smoking, liverdisease, history of thromboembolic or cardiovascular disease, or unexplained vaginalbleeding.
X-5.  and.  X-6.   The answers are A and E.   (Chap. 348)   Osteporosis is a signiﬁcant public health
problem in the United States affecting 8 million women and 2 million men. An addi-tional 18 million individuals are at risk for development of osteoporosis as measuredby low bone density (osteopenia). Most of these individuals are unaware of the pres-ence of osteopenia or osteoporosis. In the United States and Europe, fractures relatedto osteoporosis are much more common in women than men, although this is not seenin all races. Nonmodiﬁable risk factors for the development of osteoporosis include apersonal history of fracture or a history of fracture in a ﬁrst-degree relative, female sex,advanced age, and white race. African Americans have approximately one-half the riskof osteoporotic fractures as whites. Diseases that increase the risk of falls or frailty, suchas dementia and Parkinson’s disease, also increase fracture risk. Cigarette smoking, lowbody weight, low calcium intake, alcoholism, and lack of physical activity are all associ-ated with increased bone loss and fractures. Multiple drugs are associated with an in-creased risk of osteoporosis. In addition to those listed, other anticonvulsants,cytotoxic drugs, excessive thyroxine, aluminum, gonadotropin-releasing hormone ago-nists, and lithium are associated with decreased bone mass and osteoporosis. Hista-mine antagonists are not associated with osteoporosis.
X-7. The answer is C.   (Chap. 333)   Osteoporosis is a signiﬁcant public health problem in the
United States affecting 8 million women and 2 million men. An additional 18 million individu-als are at risk for development of osteoporosis as measured by low bone density (osteopenia).Most of these individuals are unaware of the presence of osteopenia or osteoporosis. In theUnited States and Europe, fractures related to osteoporosis are much more common in womenthan men, although this is not seen in all races. Diag nosis of pituitary insufﬁciency is
made by biochemical demonstration of low levels of trophic hormones in the settingof low target hormone levels. Thus, in a postmenopausal woman, a low FSH and LHwould suggest hypopituitarism. Provocative tests may also be used to test reduced pi-tuitary reserve. Growth hormone should elevate during hypoglycemic stress, notduring hyperglycemia. Elevation of aldosterone (or cortisol) after cosyntropin, corti-sol after insulin-induced hypoglycemia, or TSH after TRH are consistent with intactpituitary function. A summary of tests of pituitary insufﬁciency is shown in the fol-lowing table.
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 395
X-8. The answer is D.   (Chap. 325)   Measurement of luteinizing hormone (LH) or follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) will distinguish primary from secondary hypogonadism in
men with reduced serum testosterone levels. Elevations in LH and FSH suggest primary go-nadal dysfunction, whereas normal or reduced LH and FSH suggest a central hypothalamicpituitary defect. Patients with chronic illness such as HIV , end-stage renal disease, COPD,and cancer and patients receiving chronic corticosteroids have a high frequency of hypogo-nadism that is associated with muscle wasting. There are some reports of reversal of hypo-gonadism in patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis after a renal transplant.TABLE X-7 T ests of Pituitary Sufﬁciency
Hormone T est Blood Samples Interpretation
Growth 
hormoneInsulin tolerance test: Regular insu-
lin (0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)–30, 0, 30, 60, 120 min for glucose 
and GHGlucose < 40 mg/dL; GH should be 
>3µg/L
GHRH test: 1 µg/kg IV 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120 min for GH Normal response is GH >3 µg/L
L-Arginine test: 30 g IV over 30 min 0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH Normal response is GH >3 µg/L
L-dopa test: 500 mg PO 0, 30, 60, 120 min for GH Normal response is GH >3 µg/L
Prolactin TRH test: 200–500 µg IV 0, 20, and 60 min for TSH and PRL Normal prolactin is >2 µg/L and increase 
>200% of baseline
ACTH Insulin tolerance test: Regular insu-
lin (0.05–0.15 U/kg IV)–30, 0, 30, 60, 90 min for glucose and 
cortisolGlucose <40 mg/dL
Cortisol should increase by >7 µg/dL or to 
>20µg/dL
CRH test: 1 µg/kg ovine CRH IV at 
0800 h0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min for ACTH 
and cortisolBasal ACTH increases 2- to 4-fold and 
peaks at 20–100 pg/mL
Cortisol levels >20–25 µg/dL
Metyrapone test: Metyrapone 
(30 mg/kg) at midnightPlasma 11-deoxycortisol and corti-
sol at 8 A.M.; ACTH can also be 
measuredPlasma cortisol should be <4 µg/dL to as-
sure an adequate response
Normal response is 11-deoxycortisol >7.5 
µg/dL or ACTH >75 pg/mL
Standard ACTH stimulation test: 
ACTH 1-24 (Cosyntropin), 
0.25 mg IM or IV0, 30, 60 min for cortisol and aldos-
teroneNormal response is cortisol >21 µg/dL and 
aldosterone response of >4 ng/dL above baseline
Low-dose ACTH test: ACTH 1-24 
(Cosyntropin), 1 µg IV0, 30, 60 min for cortisol Cortisol should be >21 µg/dL
3-day ACTH stimulation test con-
sists of 0.25 mg ACTH 1-24 given IV over 8 h each dayCortisol >21 µg/dL
TSH Basal thyroid function tests: T
4, T3,
TSHBasal tests Low free thyroid hormone levels in the set-
ting of TSH levels that are not appropri-
ately increased
TRH test: 200–500 µg IV 0, 20, 60 min for TSH and PRLaTSH should increase by >5 mU/L unless 
thyroid hormone levels are increased
LH, FSH LH, FSH, testosterone, estrogen Basal tests Basal LH and FSH should be increased in 
postmenopausal women
Low testosterone levels in the setting of low 
LH and FSH
GnRH test: GnRH (100 µg) IV 0, 30, 60 min for LH and FSH In most adults, LH should increase by 10 
IU/L and FSH by 2 IU/L
Normal responses are variable
Multiple 
hormonesCombined anterior pituitary test: 
GHRH (1 µg/kg), CRH (1 µg/kg), 
GnRH (100 µg), TRH (200 µg) are 
given IV–30, 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 min for 
GH, ACTH, cortisol, LH, FSH, 
and TSHCombined or individual releasing hormone 
responses must be elevated in the context of basal target gland hormone values and may not be uniformly diagnostic (see text)
aEvoked PRL response indicates lactotrope integrity.
Note:  For abbreviations, see HPIM, 17e.
396 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
X-9. The answer is A.   (Chap. 339)   When an individual presents with profound hypoglyce-
mia and no history of diabetes mellitus, one must determine the cause expediently and
treat accordingly. Immediate treatment of this patient should include ongoing glucoseadministration while attempting to determine the cause. The initial step for diagnosingthis patient is to determine the plasma glucose, insulin, and C-peptide levels. When theplasma glucose level is <55 mg/dL, the plasma insulin levels should be low. If the insulinlevels are inappropriately high ( ≥18 pmol/L or ≥3µU/mL), the C-peptide level should be
assessed simultaneously. C-peptide is the protein fragment that remains after proinsulinis cleaved to insulin. C-peptide would be high ( ≥0.6 ng/mL) in individuals with an en-
dogenous source of hyperinsulinemia such as insulinoma. However, C-peptide levels arelow or undetectable when the source of insulin is exogenous, such as in surreptitious in-sulin intake or insulin overdose. One exception to consider in this individual is surrepti-tious intake or overdose of a sulfonylurea, an insulin secretagogue. In this case, insulinand C-peptide levels would both be elevated, and a sulfonylurea screen is also appropri-ate in this patient.
X-10. The answer is D.   (Chap. 335)   Sick-euthyroid syndrome can occur in the setting of
any acute, severe illness. Abnormalities in the levels of circulating TSH and thyroidhormone are thought to result from the release of cytokines in response to severestress. Multiple abnormalities may occur. The most common hormone pattern is adecrease in total and unbound T
3 levels as peripheral conversion of T 4 to T 3 is im-
paired. T eleologically, the fall in T 3, the most active thyroid hormone, is thought to
limit catabolism in starved or ill patients. TSH levels may vary dramatically, from 0.1to >20 mU/L, depending on when they are measured during the course of illness.Very sick patients may have a decrease in T
4 levels. This patient undoubtedly has ab-
normal thyroid function tests as a result of his injuries from the motor vehicle acci-dent. There is no indication for obtaining further imaging in this case. Steroids haveno role. The most appropriate management consists of simple observation. Over thecourse of weeks to months, as the patient recovers, thyroid function will return tonormal.
X-11. The answer is A.   (Chap. 348)   A number of biochemical tests are used to assess the rate
of bone remodeling. Bone remodeling is related to the rate of formation and resorption.Remodeling markers do not predict bone loss well enough to be applied clinically.However, measures of bone resorption may help in the prediction of risk of fracture inolder patients. In women over 65 years old, even in the presence of normal bone den-sity, a high index of bone resorption should prompt consideration for treatment. Mea-sures of bone resorption fall quickly after the initiation of antiresorptive therapy(bisphosphonates, estrogen, raloxifene, calcitonin) and provide an earlier measure ofresponse than does bone densitometry. Serum alkaline phosphatase is a measure ofbone formation, not resorption, as are serum osteocalcin and serum propeptide of typeI procollagen.
Biochemical Markers of Bone Metabolism in Clinical Use
Bone formation
Serum bone-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase
Serum osteocalcinSerum propeptide of type I procollagen 
Bone resorption
Urine and serum cross-linked N-telopeptideUrine and serum cross-linked C-telopeptideUrine total free deoxypyridinolineUrine hydroxyprolineSerum tartrate-resistant acid phosphataseSerum bone sialoproteinUrine hydroxylysine glycosides
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 397
X-12. The answer is B.   (Chap. 348)   Osteoporosis is a common disease affecting 8 million
women and 2 million men in the United States. It is most common in postmenopausal
women, but the incidence is also increasing in men. Estrogen loss probably causes bone lossby activation of bone remodeling sites and exaggeration of the imbalance between boneformation and resorption. Osteoporosis is diagnosed by bone mineral density scan. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is the most accurate test for measuring bone mineraldensity. Clinical determinations of bone density are most commonly measured at the lum-bar spine and hip. In the DXA technique, two x-ray energies are used to measure the area ofthe mineralized tissues and compared to gender- and race-matched normative values. TheT-score compares an individual’s results to a young population, whereas the Z-score com-pared the individual’s results to an age-matched population. Osteoporosis is diagnosedwhen the T-score is –2.5 SD in the lumbar spine, femoral neck, or total hip. An evaluationfor secondary causes of osteoporosis should be considered in individuals presenting withosteoporotic fractures at a young age and those who have very low Z-scores. Initial evalua-tion should include serum and 24-h urine calcium levels, renal function panel, hepaticfunction panel, serum phosphorous level, and vitamin D levels. Other endocrine abnor-malities including hyperthyroidism and hyperparathyroidism should be evaluated, and uri-nary cortisol levels should be checked if there is a clinical suspicion for Cushing’s syndrome.Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels would be elevated but are notuseful in this individual as she presents with a known perimenopausal state. 
X-13. The answer is D.   (Chap. 349)   Despite her lack of symptoms, this patient has enough evi-
dence to diagnose her with Paget disease. Her radiographs show characteristic changes of ac-tive disease in the pelvis, one of the most common areas for Paget disease to present. Herelevated alkaline phosphatase provides further evidence of active bone turnover. The normalserum calcium and phosphate levels are characteristic for Paget disease. Management ofasymptomatic Paget disease has changed since effective treatments have become available.Treatment should be initiated in all symptomatic patients and in asymptomatic patients whohave evidence of active disease (high alkaline phosphatase or urine hydroxyproline) or dis-ease adjacent to weight-bearing structures, vertebrae, or the skull. Second-generation oralbisphosphonates such as tiludronate, alendronate, and risedronate are excellent choices dueto their ability to decrease bone turnover. The major side effect from these agents is esoph-ageal ulceration and reﬂux. They should be taken in the morning, on an empty stomach, sit-ting upright to minimize the risk of reﬂux. Duration of use depends upon the clinicalresponse; typically 3–6 months are needed to see the alkaline phosphatase begin to normal-ize. IV zoledronate and pamidronate are adequate alternatives to oral bisphosphonates.While their IV administration avoids the risk of reﬂux, there is a potential of developing aﬂulike syndrome within 24 h of use. The presence of this side effect does not require drugdiscontinuation. The same time to response can be expected from these agents.
X-14. The answer is C.   (Chap. 354)   This patient is suspected to have Wilson disease, based on
clinical presentation and the visible Kayser-Fleischer ring seen in this image. The “gold-standard” for diagnosis is liver biopsy with quantitative copper assays. Kayser-Fleischerrings can be diagnosed deﬁnitively only with a slit-lamp examination and are highly spe-ciﬁc for the disease: they are present in >99% of patients who have concomitant neuropsy-chiatric manifestations of copper toxicity and in 30–50% of patients with liver involvementalone or who are presymptomatic. They do not cause visual impairment. Serum cerulo-plasmin levels are an unreliable marker of illness and should not be used for diagnosis; theyare normal in 10% of affected patients. Ceruloplasmin is a liver-derived acute-phase reac-tant that may be elevated in systemic inﬂammatory states, even in patients with Wilson dis-ease. A 24-h urine copper test can be helpful, particularly in patients who are alreadyexperiencing symptoms. Anti-smooth-muscle antibodies are often present in autoimmunehepatitis. T otal iron-binding capacity and ferritin will be abnormal in hemochromatosis.
X-15.  and . X-16.    The answers are E and B.   (Chap. 335)   Subacute thyroiditis, also known as de
Quervain’s thyroiditis, granulomatous thyroiditis, or viral thyroiditis, is a multiphase ill-ness three times more frequent in women than men. Multiple viruses have been impli-cated, but none have been deﬁnitively identiﬁed as the trigger for subacute thyroiditis. The
398 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
diagnosis can be overlooked in patients as the symptoms mimic pharyngitis, and it fre-
quently has a similarly benign course. In this patient, Graves’ disease is unlikely given herelevated TSH and negative antibody panel. Autoimmune hypothyroidism should be con-sidered; however, the tempo of her illness, the tenderness of the thyroid on examination,and her preceding viral illness make this diagnosis less likely. Ludwig’s angina is a poten-tially life-threatening bacterial infection of the retropharyngeal and submandibular spaces,often caused by preceding dental infection. Cat-scratch fever is a usually benign illness thatpresents with lymphadenopathy, fever, and malaise. It is caused by Bartonella henselae  and
is frequently transmitted from cat scratches that penetrate the epidermis. It will not causean elevated TSH. Subacute thyroiditis can present with hypothyroidism, thyrotoxicosis, orneither. In the ﬁrst phase of the disease, thyroid inﬂammation leads to follicle destructionand release of thyroid hormone. Thyrotoxicosis ensues. In the second phase, the thyroid isdepleted of hormone and hypothyroidism results. A recovery phase typically follows inwhich decreased inﬂammation allows the follicles to heal and regenerate hormone.
Large doses of aspirin (such as 600 mg by mouth every 4–6 h) or nonsteroidal anti-in-
ﬂammatory drugs are often sufﬁcient for what is usually a self-limited illness. A glucocor-ticoid taper can be used if symptoms are severe. Thyroid function should be monitoredclosely; some patients may require low-dose thyroid hormone replacement. 
X-17. The answer is A.   (Chap. 338)   The DCCT found deﬁnitive proof that reduction in
chronic hyperglycemia can prevent many of the complications of type 1 DM. This multi-center randomized trial enrolled over 1400 patients with type 1 DM to either intensive orconventional diabetes management and prospectively evaluated the development of reti-nopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. The intensive group received multiple administra-tions of insulin daily along with education and psychological counseling. The intensivegroup achieved a mean hemoglobin A
1C of 7.3% versus 9.1% in the conventional group.
Improvement in glycemic control resulted in a 47% reduction in retinopathy, a 54% reduc-tion in nephropathy, and a 60% reduction in neuropathy. There was a nonsigniﬁcant trendtoward improvement in macrovascular complications. The results of the DCCT showedthat individuals in the intensive group would attain up to 7 more years of intact vision andup to 5 more years free from lower limb amputation. Later, the United Kingdom Prospec-tive Diabetes Study (UKPDS) studied over 5000 individuals with type 2 DM. Individualsreceiving intensive glycemic control had a reduction in microvascular events but no signif-icant change in macrovascular complications. These two trials were pivotal in showing abeneﬁt of glycemic control in reducing microvascular complications in patients with type 1and type 2 DM, respectively. Another result from the UKPDS was that strict blood pressurecontrol resulted in an improvement in macrovascular complications.
X-18. The answer is B.   (Chap. 347)   Hypocalcemia can be a life-threatening consequence of thy-
roidectomy if the parathyroid glands are inadvertently removed during the surgery, as the fourparathyroid glands are located immediately posterior to the thyroid gland. This is an infre-FIGURE X-15/16 Clinical course of subacute thy-
roiditis. The release of thyroid hormones is initially
associated with a thyrotoxic phase and suppressed
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). A hypothyroid
phase then ensues, with low T4 and TSH levels that are
initially low but gradually increase. During the recov-ery phase, increased TSH levels combined with reso-
lution of thyroid follicular injury leads to normaliza-
tion of thyroid function, often several months afterthe beginning of the illness. ESR, erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate; UT
4, unbound T4. Clinical Phases0
Time (weeks)50
ESRTSH (mU/L)UT4 (pmol/L)5
0.5
0.01
6
Thyrotoxic Hypothyroid Recovery12 1840
30
10
020ESR (mm/h)100
050UT4TSH
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 399
quent occurrence currently as the parathyroid glands are better able to be identiﬁed both be-
fore and during surgery. However, hypoparathyroidism may occur even if the parathyroidglands are not removed by thyroidectomy due to devascularization or trauma to the parathy-roid glands. Hypocalcemia following removal of the parathyroid glands may begin any timeduring the ﬁrst 24–72 h, and monitoring of serial calcium levels is recommended for the ﬁrst72 h. The earliest symptoms of hypocalcemia are typically circumoral paresthesias and pares-thesias with a “pins-and needles” sensation in the ﬁngers and toes. The development of carpalspasms upon inﬂation of the blood pressure cuff is a classic sign of hypocalcemia and is knownas Trousseau sign. Chvostek sign is the other classic sign of hypocalcemia and is elicited by tap-ping the facial nerve in the preauricular area causing spasm of the facial muscles. A prolonga-tion of the QT interval on the ECG suggests life-threatening hypocalcemia that may progressto fatal arrhythmia, and treatment should not be delayed for serum testing to occur in a pa-tient with a known cause of hypocalcemia. Immediate treatment with IV calcium should beinitiated. Maintenance therapy with calcitriol and vitamin D is necessary for ongoing treat-ment of acquired hypoparathyroidism. Alternatively, surgeons may implant parathyroid tissueinto the soft tissue of the forearm, if it is thought that the parathyroid glands will be removed.Hypomagnesemia can cause hypocalcemia by suppressing parathyroid hormone release de-spite the presence of hypocalcemia. However, in this patient, hypomagnesemia is not sus-pected after thyroidectomy, and magnesium administration is not indicated. Benztropine is acentrally acting anticholinergic medication that is used in the treatment of dystonic reactionsthat can occur after taking centrally acting antiemetic medications with dopaminergic activity,such as metoclopramide or compazine. Dystonic reactions involve focal spasms of the face,neck, and extremities. While this patient has taken a medication that can cause a dystonic reac-tion, the spasms that she is experiencing are more consistent with tetanic contractions of hy-pocalcemia than dystonic reaction. Finally, measurement of forced vital capacity is mostcommonly used as a measurement of disease severity in myasthenia gravis or Guillain-Barrésyndrome. Muscle weakness is a typical presenting feature but not paresthesias.
X-19. The answer is C.   (Chap. 344)   This patient presents with the classic ﬁndings of a VIPoma,
including large-volume watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, dehydration, and hypochlorhydria(WDHA, or Verner-Morrison, syndrome). Abdominal pain is unusual. The presence of asecretory diarrhea is conﬁrmed by a stool osmolal gap [2(stool Na + stool K) – (stool osmo-lality)] <35 and persistence during fasting. In osmotic or laxative-induced diarrhea, thestool osmolal gap is over 100. In adults, over 80% of VIPomas are solitary pancreatic massesthat usually are larger than 3 cm at diagnosis. Metastases to the liver are common and pre-clude curative surgical resection. The differential diagnosis includes gastrinoma, laxativeabuse, carcinoid syndrome, and systemic mastocytosis. Diagnosis requires the demonstra-tion of large-volume secretory diarrhea (over 700 mL/d) and elevated serum VIP . CT scanof the abdomen will often demonstrate the pancreatic mass and liver metastases.
X-20. The answer is E.   (Chap. 347)   Malignancy can cause hypercalcemia by several different
mechanisms, including metastasis to bone, cytokine stimulation of bone turnover, and pro-duction of a protein structurally similar to parathyroid hormone by the tumor. This proteinis called parathyroid hormone–related peptide (PTHrp) and acts at the same receptors asparathyroid hormone (PTH). Squamous cell carcinoma of the lung is the most common tu-mor associated with the production of PTHrp. Serum calcium levels can become quite highin malignancy because of unregulated production of PTHrp that is outside of the negativefeedback control that normally results in the setting of hypercalcemia. PTH hormone levelsshould be quite low or undetectable in this setting. When hypercalcemia is severe (>15 mg/dL), symptoms frequently include dehydration and altered mental status. The electrocardio-gram may show a shortened QTc interval. Initial therapy includes large-volume ﬂuid admin-istration to reverse the dehydration that results from hypercalciuria. In addition, furosemideis also added to promote further calciuria. If the calcium remains elevated, as in this patient,additional measures should be undertaken to decrease the serum calcium. Calcitonin has arapid onset of action with a decrease in serum calcium seen within hours. However, tachy-phylaxis develops, and the duration of beneﬁt is limited. Pamidronate is a bisphosphonatethat is useful for the hypercalcemia of malignancy. It decreases serum calcium by preventing
400 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
bone resorption and release of calcium from the bone. After IV administration, the onset of
action of pamidronate is 1–2 days with a duration of action of at least 2 weeks. Thus, in thispatient with ongoing severe symptomatic hypercalcemia, addition of both calcitonin andpamidronate is the best treatment. The patient should continue to receive IV ﬂuids and furo-semide. The addition of a thiazide diuretic is contraindicated because thiazides cause in-creased calcium resorption in the kidney and would worsen hypercalcemia.
X-21. The answer is C.   (Chap. 51)   Dysmenorrhea refers to the crampy lower abdominal dis-
comfort that begins with the onset of menstrual bleeding and gradually decreases over12–72 h. Primary dysmenorrhea results from increased stores and subsequent release ofprostaglandin precursors. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory medications are effective in>80% of cases. Secondary dysmenorrhea is caused by underlying pelvic pathology, thecauses of which are many. The differential diagnosis includes endometriosis (ectopic en-dometrium), mittelschmerz (ruptured graaﬁan follicle), adenomyosis (ectopic endome-trial glands within the myometrium), and cervical stenosis. A history of sexual abusecorrelates with dyspareunia more often than dysmenorrhea.
X-22. The answer is E.   (Chap. 50)   Hirsutism is deﬁned as excessive male-pattern hair growth.
It may represent a variation on the norm or be a prelude to a more serious underlying con-dition. Virilization refers to the state in which androgen levels are elevated enough to causesigns and symptoms of changes in voice, enlargement of genitalia, and increased libido. Vi-rilization is a concerning sign for an ovarian or adrenal cause of excess androgen produc-tion. This patient’s change in voice and body habitus heightens one’s concern about avirilizing process. A thorough medication history is indicated because drugs such as pheny-toin, minoxidil, and cyclosporine have been associated with androgen-dependent hairgrowth. Family history is critical as some families have a higher incidence of hirsutism thanothers do. Congenital conditions such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia can show distinctpatterns of inheritance. Androgens are secreted by both the ovaries and the adrenal glands.An elevation in plasma total testosterone above 12 nmol/L usually indicates a virilizing tu-mor. A basal DHEAS level above 18.5 µmol/L suggests an adrenal source. Therefore, check-
ing both levels is a useful initial hormonal screen in evaluating virilization. Althoughpolycystic ovarian syndrome is by far the most common cause of ovarian androgen excess,initial screening with ultrasound is not recommended. Polycystic ovaries may be found infemales without any evidence of excess androgen secretion. Likewise, females may have anovarian source of androgen secretion with only slightly enlarged ovaries on ultrasound.Therefore, ultrasound is an insensitive and nonspecic test.
X-23. The answer is B.   (Chap. 333)   The identiﬁcation of an empty sella is often the result of an
incidental MRI ﬁnding. Typically these patients will have normal pituitary function and shouldbe reassured. It is likely that the surrounding rim of pituitary tissue is functioning normally. Anempty sella may signal the insidious onset of hypopituitarism, and laboratory results should befollowed closely. Unless her clinical situation changes, repeat MRI is not indicated. Endocrine
malignancy is unlikely, and surgery is not part of the management of an empty sella. 
X-24. The answer is C.   (Chap. 333)   Craniopharyngiomas are benign suprasellar cystic masses
that typically present with headaches, visual ﬁeld deﬁcits, and hypopituitarism. They arisenear the pituitary stalk and extend into the suprasellar cistern. They are most common inchildren and often present with signs of increased intracranial pressure. More than halfpresent before the age of 20. Weight gain, cognitive changes, sleep disorders, and visualfield defects are common. Hypopituitarism is present in 90% of cases, and diabetes in-sipidus in 10% of cases. MRI is the test of choice for evaluation. Deﬁnitive managementincludes transcranial or transsphenoidal surgical resection followed by radiation. Menin-gioma should appear on the differential of the patient above; epidemiologically, these tu-mors are more common in women than men, and tend to occur between the ages of 40and 70. Congenital pan-hypopituitarism would not explain his acute worsening nor hisincreased intracranial pressure. McCune-Albright syndrome consists of polyostotic ﬁ-brous dysplasia, pigmented skin patches, and a variety of endocrine disorders includingadenomas and pituitary tumors. Carney syndrome consists of myxomas; endocrine tu-mors including adrenal, testicular, and pituitary adenomas; and skin pigmentation.
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 401
X-25. The answer is D.   (Chap. 332)   Positive feedback control is the least understood of the
endocrine regulatory systems. The estrogen-LH relationship is a classic example of rising
levels of a hormone having a positive effect on the release of another. Paracrine regulationrefers to factors released by one cell that act on adjacent cells in the same tissue (e.g., so-matostatin released from pancreatic δ cells inhibits secretion of insulin from adjacent β
cells). Insulin-like growth factor I released from chondrocytes acts on the cells that pro-duce it, which is an example of autocrine regulation. Negative feedback control is theclassic model of an endocrine regulatory system (e.g., high levels of thyroxine inhibit fur-ther release of thyroid-stimulating hormone).
X-26. The answer is D.   (Chap. 348)   The epidemiology of fractures follows trends similar to
those for loss of bone density. Fractures of the radius increase until age 50 and then plateauby age 60. There are approximately 250,000 wrist fractures each year in the United States.However, there are approximately 300,000 hip fractures annually, with incidence rates dou-bling every 5 years after age 70. The shift from arm and wrist fractures to hip fractures maybe related to the way elderly people fall, with less frequent landing on the hands and morefrequent direct hip trauma with increasing age. There are approximately 700,000 vertebralfractures each year in the United States. Most are clinically silent and rarely require hospital-ization. They may lead to height loss, kyphosis, and pain secondary to altered biomechanics.
X-27. The answer is B.   (Chap. 348)   The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) demonstrated that
estrogen-progestin therapy can reduce the risk of hip fractures by 34%. Other clinical trialshave shown a decrease in all osteoporotic fractures, including vertebral compression frac-tures. The beneﬁcial effect of estrogen appears to be maximal in those who start therapyearly and continue taking the medication. The beneﬁt declines after discontinuation, andthere is no net beneﬁt by 10 years after discontinuation. These effects are present for oraland transdermal formulations. However, the WHI also demonstrated that estrogens are as-sociated with a 30% increase in myocardial infarction, a 40% increase in stroke, a 100% in-crease in venous thromboembolism, and a 25% increase in breast cancer. In the WHI studythere was no overall effect of estrogen-progestin therapy on mortality, probably because ofthe balance between the detrimental cardiovascular effects and the beneﬁcial effects (in ad-dition to fractures, there was a beneﬁcial effect on the development of colon cancer).
X-28. The answer is D.   (Chap. 348)   The selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
tamoxifen and raloxifene act in a fashion similar to that of estrogen in decreasing bone turn-over and bone loss in postmenopausal women. These agents have been shown to decrease therisk of invasive breast cancer. Raloxifene, which is approved for the prevention of osteoporo-sis, reduces the risk of vertebral fractures by 30 to 50%. There are no data conﬁrming a similareffect on nonvertebral fractures. Optimal calcium intake reduces bone loss and suppressesbone turnover. Vitamin D plus calcium supplements have been shown to reduce the risk ofhip fractures by 20 to 30%. The bisphosphonates alendronate and risedronate are structurallyrelated to pyrophosphate and are incorporated into bone matrix. They reduce the number ofosteoclasts and impair the function of those already present. Both have been shown to reducethe risk of vertebral and hip fractures by 40 to 50%. One trial found that risedronate reducedhip fractures in osteoporotic women in their seventies but not in older women without osteo-porosis. Risedronate may be administered weekly. The newer bisphosphonates zoledronateand ibandronate may be dosed yearly or monthly. A daily injection of exogenous parathyroidhormone analogue superimposed on estrogen therapy produced increases in bone mass anddecreased vertebral and nonvertebral fractures by 45 to 65%. There are no published studiesof combinations of parathyroid hormone and SERMs or bisphosphonates.
X-29. The answer is E.   (Chap. 337)   Complete removal of the pheochromocytoma is the only
therapy that leads to a long-term cure, although 90% of tumors are benign. However,preoperative control of hypertension is necessary to prevent surgical complications andlower mortality. This patient is presenting with encephalopathy in a hypertensive crisis.The hypertension should be managed initially with IV medications to lower the meanarterial pressure by ~20% over the initial 24-h period. Medications that can be used forhypertensive crisis in pheochromocytoma include nitroprusside, nicardipine, and phen-
402 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
tolamine. Once the acute hypertensive crisis has resolved, transition to oral α-adrenergic
blockers is indicated. Phenoxybenzamine is the most commonly used drug and is started
at low doses (5–10 mg three times daily) and titrated to the maximum tolerated dose(usually 20–30 mg daily). Once alpha blockers have been initiated, beta blockade cansafely be utilized and is particularly indicated for ongoing tachycardia. Liberal salt andﬂuid intake helps expand plasma volume and treat orthostatic hypotension. Once bloodpressure is maintained below 160/100 mmHg with moderate orthostasis, it is safe to pro-ceed to surgery. If blood pressure remains elevated despite treatment with alpha block-ade, addition of calcium channel blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers, or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors should be considered. Diuretics should be avoided as theywill exacerbate orthostasis. 
X-30. The answer is B.   (Chap. 336)   Control of renin release involves the independent actions
of four factors: the juxtaglomerular cells, macula densa cells, the sympathetic nervoussystem, and circulating factors such as potassium concentration and atrial natriureticpeptide concentration. When effective circulating volume is low, cells in the juxtaglomer-ular apparatus (JGA) perceive this as a decreased stretch exerted on the afferent arteriolewall, and renin secretion is augmented. Macula densa cells may function as chemorecep-tors monitoring the sodium and chloride load delivered to the distal tubule. Under con-ditions of low solute load delivered to the distal tubule, a signal is conveyed to increasejuxtaglomerular release of renin. Increased sympathetic activity stimulates the JGA to re-lease renin when upright posture is assumed. Increased potassium intake and release ofatrial natriuretic peptide both decrease renin release.
X-31. The answer is E.   (Chap. 333)   Pituitary adenomas are very common and are the most
likely cause of pituitary hormone excess or deﬁciency states in adults. They make up 10%of all intracranial neoplasms. Pituitary microadenomas are present in ~25% of all autop-sies, independent of ante-mortem clinical disease, and are usually unsuspected. 10% ofthe general population will have a microadenoma on head imaging. The clinical and bio-chemical phenotype of pituitary adenomas depend on the cell type from which theyarise. They may cause hypersecretion or hyposecretion syndromes.
X-32. The answer is B.   (Chap. 337)   This patient has the classic triad of symptoms for pheochro-
mocytoma: headaches, palpitations, and profuse sweating. When this triad of symptoms isfound in association with hypertension, pheochromocytoma is the most likely diagnosis. Dif-ferential diagnosis for pheochromocytoma includes panic disorder, essential hypertension,cocaine or methamphetamine abuse, carcinoid syndrome, intracranial mass, clonidine with-drawal, and factitious disorder. While episode hypertension is classically described in associa-tion with pheochromocytoma, many patients have sustained hypertension that may bedifﬁcult to treat. In addition, 5–15% of individuals may present with normal blood pressure(WM Manger: J Clin Hypertens 4: 62, 2002 ). The patient also exhibits signiﬁcant orthostatic
changes in blood pressure which is a common ﬁnding in pheochromocytoma. Interestingly,there is a case report of treatment with paroxetine unmasking symptoms of pheochromocy-toma ( MA Seeler et al: Ann Intern Med 126: 333, 1997 ). The cornerstone of diagnosis of
pheochromocytoma is the documentation of elevated levels of urine and plasma catechol-amines. The usual diagnostic algorithm includes the measurement of vanillylmandelic acid,catecholamines, and fractionated metanephrines in a 24-h urine collection or plasma sample.These tests should be greater than two to three times the upper limit of normal. If metaneph-rines are elevated, a CT scan or MRI of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is performed withcontrast to localize the site of the pheochromocytoma. Nuclear imaging with 
123I or 131I-
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) can also be utilized for localization of the pheochromocy-toma after biochemical testing has conﬁrmed elevated levels of catecholamines. Given theclassic symptoms of this patient, panic attack is a diagnosis of exclusion because the misseddiagnosis of pheochromocytoma increases the risk of adverse outcomes, including death andstroke. Carcinoid syndrome is diagnosed with 24-h urine testing for 5-HIAA, but is unlikelyin this patient because carcinoid syndrome is not associated with hypertension.
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 403
X-33. The answer is B.   (Chap. 332)   With few exceptions, hormone binding is highly speciﬁc
for a single type of nuclear receptor. The mineralocorticoid-glucocorticoid hormones are
a notable exception because the mineralocorticoid receptor also has a high, but notgreater, afﬁnity for glucocorticoid. An enzyme (11 β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase) lo-
cated in renal tubules inactivates glucocorticoid, allowing selective responses to miner-alocorticoid. When there is glucocorticoid excess, the enzyme becomes oversaturated andglucocorticoid can exhibit mineralocorticoid effects. This effect is in contrast to the es-trogen receptor, where different compounds confer unique transcription machinery.Mineralocorticoid hormones do not have serum-binding proteins. Examples of hor-mones that circulate with serum-binding proteins are: T
4, T 3, cortisol, estrogen, and
growth hormone. Most binding protein abnormalities have little clinical consequence be-cause the free concentrations of the hormone often remain normal.
X-34. The answer is E.   (Chap. 335)   The thionamides propylthiouracil (PTU), carbimazole, and
methimazole are the main antithyroid medications used for the treatment of hyperthyroidism.They all inhibit the function of thyroid peroxidase, reducing oxidation and organiﬁcation ofiodide. PTU also inhibits the deiodination of T
4 to T 3. PTU has a half-life much shorter than
that of methimazole. Rash, urticaria, fever, and arthralgias are common side effects, occurringin up to 5% of these patients. They may resolve spontaneously. Major side effects are rare butinclude hepatitis, agranulocytosis, and a systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like syndrome. Ifmajor side effects are noted, it is essential that antithyroid medications be stopped.
X-35. The answer is B.   (Chap. 347)   Hyperparathyroidism is the most common cause of hy-
percalcemia and is the most likely cause in an adult who is asymptomatic. Cancer is the sec-ond most common cause of hypercalcemia but usually is associated with symptomatichypercalcemia. In addition, there are frequently symptoms from the malignancy itself thatdominate the clinical picture. Primary hyperparathyroidism results from autonomous se-cretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) that is no longer regulated by serum calcium levels,usually related to development of parathyroid adenomas. Most patients are asymptomaticor have minimal symptoms at the time of diagnosis. When present, symptoms include re-current nephrolithiasis, peptic ulcers, dehydration, constipation, and altered mental status.Laboratory studies show elevated serum calcium with decreased serum phosphate. Diagno-sis can be conﬁrmed with measurement of parathyroid hormone levels. Surgical removal ofautonomous adenomas is generally curative, but not all patients need to be treated surgi-cally. It is recommended that individuals <50 undergo primary surgical resection. However,in those >50 years, a cautious approach with frequent laboratory monitoring is often used.Surgery can then be undertaken if a patient develops symptomatic or worsening hypercal-cemia or complications such as osteopenia. Breast cancer is a frequent cause of hypercalce-mia because of metastatic disease to the bone. In this patient who has received routinemammography as part of age-appropriate cancer screening and is asymptomatic, thiswould be unlikely. Multiple myeloma is another malignancy frequently associated with hy-percalcemia that is thought to be due to production of cytokines and humoral mediators bythe tumor. Multiple myeloma should not present with isolated hypercalcemia and is associ-ated with anemia and elevations in creatinine.
Approximately 20% of individuals with hyperthyroidism develop hypercalcemia related to
increased bone turnover. This patient exhibits no signs or symptoms of hyperthyroidism,making the diagnosis unlikely. Vitamin D intoxication is a rare cause of hypercalcemia. An in-dividual must ingest 40–100 times the recommended daily amount in order to develop hyper-calcemia. Because vitamin D acts to increase both calcium and phosphate absorption fromthe intestine, serum levels of both minerals would be elevated, which is not seen in this case.
X-36. The answer is A.   (Chap. 335)   Thyrotoxicosis presents with a characteristic set of signs
and symptoms. Common signs include tachycardia and atrial ﬁbrillation, tremor, goiter,and warm, moist skin. Common symptoms include hyperactivity, dysphoria, irritability,heat intolerance, excessive sweating, and fatigue. Weight loss occurs frequently; however,some patients will gain weight as they typically have a marked increase in appetite. Themost common cardiac abnormality of thyrotoxicosis is sinus tachycardia. In older pa-
404 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
tients atrial ﬁbrillation is frequently seen. These arrhythmias are a manifestation of a
high-output state, which frequently leads to a widened pulse pressure and a systolic mur-mur. This can exacerbate underlying heart failure or coronary disease. Up to 50% of pa-tients with atrial ﬁbrillation related to untreated thyrotoxicosis will convert to normalsinus rhythm with management of their thyroid condition.
X-37. The answer is D.   (Chap. 335)   Hyperthyroidism is treated by reducing thyroid hor-
mone synthesis, using antithyroid drugs, reducing the amount of thyroid tissue with ra-dioactive iodine, or by thyroidectomy. Antithyroid drugs are used more frequently inJapan and Europe, whereas radioactive thyroid is used more frequently in North Amer-ica. Propthiouracil and methimazole are the most commonly used antithyroid drugs andact by inhibiting the function of thyroid peroxidase. In Graves’ disease, they also reducethyroid antibody levels. Thyroid function tests and clinical manifestations are reviewedevery 3–4 weeks with dose titrated based on unbound T
4 levels. Euthyroidism usually
takes 6–8 weeks with this regimen. Agranulocytosis occurs in <1% of patients. Since ra-dioactive iodine is contraindicated in pregnancy, propthiouracil may be used carefullysince blocking doses may cause fetal hypothyroidism. Diltiazem may be used to slowheart rate in atrial ﬁbrillation; however, beta blockers are effective in hyperthyroidism tocontrol adrenergic symptoms. Itraconazole is an antifungal agent. Phenoxybenzamine isanα-adrenergic blocker often used to control blood pressure in patients with pheochro-
mocytoma. Liothyronine is the oral form of triiodothyronine (T
3) and would not be used
in hyperthyroidism. Levothyroxine has been used in combination with antithyroid drugs(block-replace regimen) to avoid drug-induced hypothyroidism.
X-38. The answer is B.   (Chap. 335)   While hypothyroidism may be strongly suspected from his-
tory and physical examination ﬁndings, it is deﬁnitively diagnosed with serum laboratorymeasurements. TSH should be the ﬁrst test sent. A normal TSH level excludes primary, butnot secondary, hypothyroidism. Primary hypothyroidism refers to disease caused by hypo-function of the thyroid gland itself. Secondary hypothyroidism typically arises from disease ofthe anterior pituitary. If the TSH is low or normal and pituitary disease is suspected, a free T
4
should be sent. If this test is low, the differential includes anterior pituitary dysfunction, sickeuthyroid syndrome, and drug effects. TSH, not unbound T
4, is the test of choice for diagnos-
ing subclinical hypothyroidism. In these cases, TSH is elevated and T 4 is normal. Thyroid per-
oxidase antibodies are present in >90% of patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism; thistest helps distinguish autoimmune causes of hypothyroidism from other possibilities. Circu-lating T
3 levels are normal in ~25% of patients with clinical hypothyroidism and are not indi-
cated for diagnosis. A T 3/T4 ratio is not helpful for diagnosis or prognosis.
FIGURE X-38 Evaluation of hy-
pothyroidism. TPOAb+, thyroid
peroxidase antibodies present;
TPOAb–, thyroid peroxidase anti-
bodies not present; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.Measure unbound T4
Measure unbound T4 Mild
  hypothyroidismMeasure TSH
Elevated
NormalNormal
Primary  hypothyroidismLow
Autoimmune  hypothyroidismRule out other  causes of  hypothyroidism
T
4 treatmentTPOAb+ or
  symptomaticTPOAb–, no
symptoms
Annual follow-up T4 treatmentTPOAb+TPOAb–Pituitary disease suspected?
No further  testsNormal
Yes
Rule out drug effects, sick  euthyroid syndrome,  then evaluate anterior  pituitary functionNo further  testsNo
LowEVALUATION OF HYPOTHYROIDISM
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 405
X-39. The answer is E.   (Chap. 335)   Autoimmune hypothyroidism is a common diagnosis,
present in 4 per 1000 women and 1 per 1000 men. The mean age of diagnosis is 60 years.
It is more prevalent in locations with chronic exposure to a high-iodine diet, such as Ja-pan. Subclinical hypothyroidism (elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone, normal un-bound T
4) is present in 6–8% of women and 3% of men. It is present in up to 10% of
adults >60 years of age. There is an association between autoimmune hypothyroidismand other autoimmune conditions, and there appears to be a heritable familial risk of de-veloping disease. There are likely environmental triggers other than heavy iodine expo-sure that predispose to the disease phenotype in susceptible individuals, but these havenot been identiﬁed. Autoimmune thyroiditis may present with or without a goiter. Whena goiter is present, it is termed Hashimoto’s thyroiditis . The goiter is due to lymphocytic
inﬁltration of the thyroid. Eventually atrophy of thyroid follicles leads to shrinkage of thegland. Atrophic thyroiditis likely represents the end stage of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.There is no evidence that viral thyroiditis induces subsequent autoimmune thyroiditis.
X-40. The answer is D.   (Chap. 332)   Hormones can be broadly divided into ﬁve classes: amino
acid derivatives, small neuropeptides, large proteins, steroid hormones, and vitamin deriv-atives. As a rule, amino acid derivatives and peptide hormones interact with cell-surfaceproteins while steroids, thyroid hormone, vitamin D, and retinoids interact with intracel-lular nuclear receptors. In a cell line impermeable to passage by extracellular molecules,steroids, thyroid hormone, vitamin D, and retinoids would not be able to exert their effecton the nuclear receptors. Hormones that interact with cell-surface membrane receptorswould still be able to initiate their signaling. Dopamine is an amino acid derivative. Go-nadotropin-releasing hormone is a small neuropeptide. Insulin is a large protein.
X-41. The answer is B.   (Chap. 335)   Thyrotoxicosis is a state of hormone excess. It is not synony-
mous with hyperthyroidism, which is the result of excessive thyroid function. Graves’ disease ac-counts for 60–80% of thyrotoxicosis. Graves’ disease is caused by the presence of thyroid-stimulating antibodies, which autonomously activate the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptorand cause overproduction of thyroid hormone. Other common causes of thyrotoxicosis includetoxic multinodular goiter and toxic thyroid adenoma. Thyrotoxicosis without hyperthyroidismmay occur in subacute thyroiditis, thyroid destruction from amiodarone or radiation, or inges-tion of excess thyroid hormone. Graves’ disease is common among populations with high io-dine intake and occurs in up to 2% of women. It is one-tenth as frequent in men. It rarelypresents in adolescence, and is most prevalent in patients between the ages of 20 and 50 years.
X-42. The answer is C.   (Chap. 350)   The child exhibits clinical and laboratory manifestations of
homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). The presence of childhood xanthomas in-cluding hands, wrists, elbows, knees, and buttocks with evidence of premature atherosclerosisis characteristic. The atherosclerosis often develops initially in the aortic root, causing valvu-lar or supravalvular stenosis. Drug therapy is often ineffective, and LDL apheresis is usuallythe necessary therapy. Before initiating therapy to reduce his LDL, it is necessary to rule outhypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, and obstructive liver disease. Although parental con-trol of the patient’s diet is also partly to blame, deliberate or unintentional ingestion of a poordiet is less likely to be responsible than a genetic disorder. Familial defective apoB100 is adominantly inherited disorder that may be confused with heterozygous FH, but not homozy-gous. These patients usually present with cardiovascular disease in adulthood. Syphilis cancause aortitis; however, it does not cause premature coronary artery disease. 
X-43. The answer is D.   (Chap. 350)   This patient has signs and symptoms of familial hypercho-
lesterolemia (FH) with elevated plasma LDL, normal triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, andpremature coronary artery disease. FH is an autosomal codominant lipoprotein disorderthat is the most common of these syndromes caused by a single gene disorder. It has ahigher prevalence in Afrikaners, Christian Lebanese, and French Canadians. There is no de-ﬁnitive diagnostic test for FH. FH may be diagnosed with a skin biopsy that shows reducedLDL receptor activity in cultured ﬁbroblasts (although there is considerable overlap withnormals). FH is predominantly a clinical diagnosis, although molecular diagnostics are be-ing developed. Hemolysis is not a feature of FH. Sitosterolemia is distinguished from FH byepisodes of hemolysis. It is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that causes a marked increase
406 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
in the dietary absorption of plant sterols. Hemolysis is due to incorporation of plant sterols
into the red blood cell membrane. Sitosterolemia is conﬁrmed by demonstrating an in-crease in the plasma levels of sitosterol using gas chromatography. CT scanning of the liverdoes not sufﬁciently differentiate between the hyperlipoproteinemias. Many of the primarylipoproteinemias, including sitosterolemia, are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern,and thus, a pedigree analysis would not be likely to isolate the disorder.
X-44. The answer is E.   (Chap. 333)   Oral dopamine agonists, cabergoline or bromocriptine,
are the mainstay of treatment for prolactinomas, regardless of their size. Patients withmacroadenomas (>1 cm in diameter) should undergo visual ﬁeld testing before startingtherapy. MRI and visual ﬁeld testing should be assessed at 6- to 12-month intervals toevaluate for shrinkage of the mass. Indications for surgery include dopamine agonist re-sistance or intolerance, invasive tumor or lack of improvement on visual ﬁeld testing. 
X-45. The answer is C.   (Chap. 336)   Plasma and urine assessment of steroid levels may be mis-
leading due to improper collection or altered metabolism. Moreover, the plasma level de-pends on the secretion rate and the rate at which the hormone is metabolized. As such,stimulation tests are used to diagnose hormone deﬁciency states, while suppression tests doc-ument hypersecretion of adrenal hormones. One protocol for assessing mineralocorticoiddeﬁciency involves severe sodium restriction, which is a potent stimulator of mineralocorti-coid release. Rates of aldosterone secretion should increase two- to threefold. When dietarysodium intake is normal, stimulation testing of mineralocorticoid deﬁciency may be achievedby injection of a potent diuretic (e.g., 40–80 mg of furosemide) followed by 2–3 h of uprightposture. The normal response is a two- to fourfold increase in plasma aldosterone levels.
X-46. The answer is E.   (Chap. 335)   This patient has signs and symptoms of Graves’ disease.
In patients with thyrotoxicosis due to Graves’ disease, the TSH level is low and total andunbound thyroid hormone levels are increased. In 2–5% of patients, only the T
3 levels
will be increased. In this patient, with a high pre-test probability of Graves’ disease, a sup-pressed TSH and normal T
4 supports Graves’; however, testing of T 3 should be per-
FIGURE X-46 Evaluation of
thyrotoxicosis. aDiffuse goiter,
positive TPO antibodies, oph-
thalmopathy, dermopathy; bcan
be conﬁrmed by radionuclidescan. TSH, thyroid-stimulating
hormone.Primary
  thyrotoxicosis
Features of  Graves’ disease
a?T3 toxicosis Subclinical
  hyperthyroidismTSH low, uncombined  T
4 highMeasure TSH, uncombined T4
Yes NoNormalMeasure  uncombined T
3TSH normal or increased,  high uncombined T
4
TSH-secreting  pituitary adenoma  or thyroid hormone  resistance syndrome
Follow up in  6-12 weeksHigh
Graves’ disease Multinodular goiter or toxic adenoma
b?
Yes No
Toxic nodular hyperthyroidism Low radionuclide uptake?
Yes No
Destructive thyroiditis, iodine excess  or excess thyroid hormoneRule out other causes including stimulation  by chorionic gonadotropinTSH low, uncombined  T
4 normalTSH and uncombined  T
4 normal
No further testsEVALUATION OF THYROTOXICOSIS
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 407
formed to deﬁnitively make the diagnosis. A total T 4 level would not provide deﬁnitive
evidence of Graves’ disease. Radionuclide scan of the thyroid is used to evaluate for toxic
multinodular goiter and toxic adenoma. Measurement of thyroid-stimulating antibodiesand thyroid peroxidase antibodies will help conﬁrm the diagnosis of Graves’ but are notroutinely used since the diagnosis may be made with a consistent clinical picture com-bined with supportive TSH and thyroid hormone results.
X-47. The answer is B.   (Chap. 51)   Pregnancy, whether intrauterine or ectopic, is the most
common cause of secondary amenorrhea and should be ruled out early in the evaluationof such patients. In a patient with secondary amenorrhea, uterine outﬂow tract obstruc-tion is uncommon unless there has been curettage for pregnancy complications or, in anendemic region, genital tuberculosis. Primary ovarian failure is ruled out by the low lev-els of FSH in that FSH levels should be very elevated if anovulation is caused by ovarianpathology. Malnutrition or extreme weight loss (BMI <18) may cause secondary amen-orrhea, but these are not likely in this case. An MRI is indicated in this patient with sec-ondary amenorrhea because she is not pregnant, does not have evidence of primaryovarian failure, has an elevated prolactin levels and a normal thyroid-stimulating hor-mone levels. These results suggest the possibility of central nervous system pathology.
X-48. The answer is C.   (Chap. 341)   Evaluation of infertility should include evaluation of com-
mon male and female factors that could be contributing. Abnormalities of menstrual functionare the most common cause of female infertility, and initial evaluation of infertility should in-clude evaluation of ovulation and assessment of tubal and uterine patency. The female partnerreports an episode of gonococcal infection with symptoms of pelvic inﬂammatory disease,which would increase her risk of infertility due to tubal scarring and occlusion. A hysterosal-pingogram is indicated. If there is evidence of tubal abnormalities, many experts recommendin vitro fertilization for conception as these women are at increased risk of ectopic pregnancyif conception occurs. The female partner reports some irregularity of her menses, suggestinganovulatory cycles, and thus, evidence of ovulation should be determined by assessing hor-monal levels. There is no evidence that prolonged use of oral contraceptives affects fertility ad-versely ( A Farrow, et al: Hum Reprod 17: 2754, 2002 ). Angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, including lisinopril, are known teratogens when taken by women, but have no ef-fects on chromosomal abnormalities in men. Recent marijuana use may be associated withincreased risk of infertility, and in vitro studies of human sperm exposed to a cannabinoid de-rivative showed decreased motility ( LB Whan, et al: Fertil Steril 85: 653, 2006 ). However, no
studies have shown long-term decreased fertility in men who previously used marijuana.
X-49. The answer is B.   (Chap. 343)   Disorders of sexual differentiation involve both chromoso-
mal disorders as well as gonadal and phenotypic disorders. Klinefelter syndrome classicallyis associated with a 47,XXY karyotype resulting from meiotic nondisjunction. Clinically, in-dividuals with Klinefelter syndrome present in young adulthood with poor virilization andeunuchoid proportions noted by tall height with long leg length. Secondary sexual develop-ment is poor, with decreased facial and axillary hair and low sexual drive. Gynecomastia isfrequently present, and the testes have a median length of 2.5 cm with almost all <3.5 cm. Itis noted that the testes seem particularly small given the degree of androgenization present.A testicular biopsy would show hyalinization of the seminiferous tubules and azoospermia.Learning difﬁculties are frequently associated. Individuals with Klinefelter syndrome arealso at increased risk of thromboembolic disease, diabetes mellitus, breast tumors, and obe-sity. Laboratory tests would reveal elevated follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizinghormone with low plasma testosterone consistent with primary testicular failure. Increasedconcentrations of estradiol are also commonly encountered and are responsible for the de-velopment of gynecomastia. Treatment of the disorder primarily is androgen supplementa-tion. Severe gynecomastia may require surgical reduction of breast tissue.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) was previously known as testicular feminization and
is a disorder caused by a mutation in the androgen receptor. Complete AIS is characterized by afemale phenotype in XY individuals with normal breast development. However, there is nouterus, the vagina is short, and there is minimal axillary and pubic hair development. 
408 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis results from a 45,X/46,XY mosaicism. Phenotype can be ei-
ther male or female, and most individuals have ambiguous genitalia at birth. If the pri-
mary phenotype is male, hypospadias are common, and dysgenetic gonads lead to anincreased risk of gonadoblastomas and other malignancies. 
T esticular dysgenesis is also known as Swyer syndrome. These individuals have a com-
plete absence of androgenization, and external genitalia is usually female or ambiguous. 
True hermaphroditism is now known as ovotesticular DSD (disorder of sexual devel-
opment). Both ova and testes are found in a single individual, and sometimes this ismanifest as an ovotestis. The karyotype is most frequently 46,XX.
X-50. The answer is C.   (Chap. 340)   Many drugs may interfere with testicular function through
a variety of mechanisms. Cyclophosphamide damages the seminiferous tubules in a dose-and time-dependent fashion and causes azoospermia within a few weeks of initiation. Thiseffect is reversible in approximately half these patients. Ketoconazole inhibits testosteronesynthesis. Spironolactone causes a blockade of androgen action. Glucocorticoids lead to hy-pogonadism predominantly through inhibition of hypothalamic-pituitary function. Sexualdysfunction has been described as a side effect of therapy with beta blockers. However,there is no evidence of an effect on testicular function. Most reports of sexual dysfunctionwere in patients receiving older beta blockers such as propranolol and timolol.
X-51.  and.  X-52.   The answer is E for both.   (Chaps. 347 and 85)   Malignancy may cause hyper-
calcemia by metastasizing to bone or producing ectopic PTHrp. Bone scan is a sensitive testfor bone metastasis, making ectopic hormone production more likely in this case. PTHrp isa tumor-associated protein that is most often seen in squamous cell tumors of the lung.There are high concentrations in human breast milk, although the physiologic signiﬁcanceis unknown. At the cellular level it behaves like PTHi binding to receptors on bone and kid-ney to increase calcium resorption and stimulate synthesis of 1,25 vitamin D. Elevations ofPTHrp and PTHi cause an elevated calcium and low phosphate. While primary hyperpara-thyroidism is the most common cause of hypercalcemia, in the presence of a lung mass,PTHrp is more likely. Serum magnesium is usually normal in primary hyperparathyroid-ism or in PTHrp-related hypercalcemia. Small cell carcinoma of the lung may secreteACTH, causing Cushing’s syndrome, but this would not present with isolated hypercalce-mia. It also may secrete antidiuretic hormone, causing syndrome of inappropriate antidi-uretic hormone. Bronchial carcinoids may produce peptide hormones including serotonin,bradykinin, ACTH, or somatostatin. Adenocarcinomas cause hypercalcemia by metastasiz-ing to bone, which would cause an abnormal bone scan. Bronchoalveolar carcinomas donot usually cause ectopic hormone production or metastasize to bone. 
X-53. The answer is C.   (Chap. 347)   The four parathyroid glands are located posterior to the
thyroid gland. Parathyroid hormone is the primary regulator of calcium. PTH acts directlyon bone and the kidney and indirectly, through the action of vitamin D, on the GI tract.Calcium induces calcium absorption from the kidney and bone. It stimulates hydroxylationof 25-hydroxyvitamin D, resulting in the more active form. Vitamin D stimulates calciumresorption from the GI tract. Calcium and vitamin D are part of a feedback loop that inhib-its PTH release and synthesis. PTH prevents resorption of phosphate from the kidney.
X-54. The answer is C.   (Chap. 348)   Determination of when to initiate screening for osteoporosis
with bone densitometry testing can be complicated by multiple factors. In general, mostwomen do not require screening for osteoporosis until after completion of menopause unlessthere have been unexplained fractures or other risk factors that would suggest osteoporosis.There is no beneﬁt to initiating screening for osteoporosis in the perimenopausal period. In-deed most expert recommendations do not recommend routine screening for osteoporosisuntil age 65 or older unless risk factors are present. Risk factors for osteoporosis include ad-vanced age, cigarette smoking, low body weight (<57.7 kg), family history of hip fracture, andlong-term glucocorticoid use. Inhaled glucocorticoids may cause increased loss of bone den-sity, but as this patient is on a low dose of inhaled ﬂuticasone and is not estrogen-deﬁcient,bone mineral densitometry cannot be recommended at this time. The risk of osteoporosis re-lated to inhaled glucocorticoids is not well-deﬁned, but most studies suggest that the risk is rel-
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 409
atively low, and inhaled glucocorticoids do not confer a threefold greater risk of osteoporosis.
Delaying childbearing until the fourth and ﬁfth decade does increase the risk of osteoporosisbut does not cause early onset of osteoporosis prior to completion of menopause. The patient’sfamily history of menopause likewise does not require early screening for osteoporosis. 
X-55. The answer is C.   (Chap. 335)   The main clinical symptoms of hypothyroidism include
tiredness, weakness, dry skin, feeling cold, hair loss, difﬁculty concentrating, constipationwith poor appetite, dyspnea, and hoarse voice. Menorrhagia, amenorrhea, paresthesias, andimpaired hearing may also occur. Signs of hypothyroidism include dry coarse skin, puffyhands/face/feet (myxedema), diffuse alopecia, bradycardia, peripheral edema, delayed ten-don reﬂex relaxation, carpal tunnel syndrome, and serous cavity effusions. The symptomsof hyperthyroidism include hyperactivity, irritability, dysphoria, heat intolerance, sweating,palpitations, fatigue and weakness, weight loss with increased appetite, diarrhea, loss of li-bido, polyuria, and oligomenorrhea. Signs include tachycardia, atrial ﬁbrillation (particu-larly in the elderly), tremor, goiter, warm moist skin, proximal myopathy, lid lag, andgynecomastia. Exophthalmous is speciﬁc for Graves’ disease. TSH is the most effectivescreening test for hypothyroidism. If elevated, an unbound T
4 is necessary to conﬁrm clini-
cal hypothyroidism. T esting of unbound T 4 will not detect subclinical hypothyroidism.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is present when the TSH is elevated and unbound T 4 is normal.
Patients may have minor or early symptoms of hypothyroidism in this stage.
X-56. The answer is B.   (Chap. 346)   Hypophosphatemia results from one of three mechanisms:
inadequate intestinal phosphate absorption, excessive renal phosphate excretion, and rapidredistribution of phosphate from the extracellular space into bone or soft tissue. Inadequateintestinal absorption is rare. Malnutrition from fasting or starvation may result in depletionof phosphate, causing hypophosphatemia during refeeding. In hospitalized patients, redis-tribution is the main cause. Insulin drives phosphate into cells. Sepsis may cause destructionof cells and metabolic acidosis, resulting in a net shift of phosphate from the extracellularspace into cells. Renal failure is associated with hyperphosphatemia, not hypophosphatemia.
X-57. The answer is D.   (Chap. 347)   Primary hyperparathyroidism and malignancy account
for over 90% of cases of hypercalcemia. In asymptomatic patients, primary hyperpara-thyroidism is the most common cause. In patients admitted to the hospital with sympto-matic hypercalcemia, malignancy is the most common cause. Calcium is regulated inbone, the gastrointestinal tract, and the kidney. Other causes of increased bone turnoverinclude Paget’s disease, immobilization, hyperthyroidism, hypervitaminosis A, and adre-nal insufﬁciency. Causes of increased GI absorption include vitamin D intoxication andmilk-alkali syndrome. Hypercalcemia from thiazide diuretics and familial hypocalciurichypercalcemia result from disordered regulation of calcium in the kidney.
X-58. The answer is A.   (Chap. 341)   Infertility is deﬁned as the inability to conceive after 12
months of unprotected sexual intercourse and affects 14% of couples in the United States.Infertility is attributable to female causes in 58% of cases, male causes in 25% of cases, and17% remain unexplained after evaluation. Initial evaluation of the infertile couple includescounseling regarding the appropriate timing of intercourse and discussion of modiﬁable riskfactors for infertility, including drug and alcohol use, cigarette smoking, caffeine, and obe-sity. A semen analysis is performed to determine sperm count, and if the sperm count is lowon repeated analysis, measurement of serum testosterone, FSH, and LH are indicated to de-termine if hypogonadism is contributing to infertility. In the female partner, it is importantto conﬁrm ovulation and assess tubal patency. This evaluation includes testing of FSH, LH,prolactin, and estradiol levels in many individuals. A mid-cycle progesterone level may alsobe useful to document that the mid-cycle LH surge has occurred. Polycystic ovarian syn-drome can be found in 30% of women who have anovulatory cycle and is associated withandrogen excess. If polycystic ovarian syndrome is suspected, the female partner should havelevels of testosterone and dehydroepiandosterone assessed. Determination of patency of theuterine outﬂow tract and Fallopian tubes is also recommended through performance of ahysterosalpingogram. Endometrial biopsy was once a frequent component of the evaluationof infertility to exclude luteal-phase insufﬁciency, which would affect fetal implantation.
410 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
However, prior research has a high degree of intraobserver variability in the dating criteria
used to assess endometrial biopsies ( TC Li, et al: Fertil Steril 51: 759, 1989 ). Moreover, out-of-
phase biopsies are seen on a single endometrial sample in >30–50% of fertile women and insequential samples in 7–27% ( OK Davis, et al: Fertil Steril 51:  582, 1989 ).
X-59. The answer is A.   (Chap. 51)   This patient describes primary amenorrhea. It is important
to rule out disorders of the uterus or outﬂow tract before initiating an exhaustive workupfor hormonal causes. On examination, one may ﬁnd obstruction of the transverse vaginalseptum or an imperforate hymen, which should be treated surgically. An MRI may furtherdelineate an abnormal genital tract but should not be performed prior to a physical exam-ination. In a nonpregnant woman with primary amenorrhea, an elevated FSH would sug-gest primary ovarian failure. An elevated prolactin in such a patient should direct yourevaluation towards a neuroanatomic abnormality or hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.
X-60. The answer is E.   (Chap. 354)   The management strategy for Wilson disease is dependent
on the clinical status of the patient. Patients who are presymptomatic or who have hepatitisbut no evidence of liver decompensation should be treated with zinc. This nontoxic therapyacts to block copper uptake in the gastrointestinal tract and sequesters copper in the bodyby inducing hepatic metallothionein synthesis. Patients with mild to moderate hepatic de-compensation should receive both zinc and trientine, a copper-chelating agent that has re-placed penicillamine because of its superior side-effect proﬁle. Those with severe hepaticdecompensation are candidates for liver transplantation. T etrathiomolybdate combinedwith zinc are ﬁrst-line for patients with neuropsychiatric symptoms. Treatment is life-longfor all patients. Dimercaprol is used in lead poisoning and has no role in Wilson disease.
X-61. The answer is D.   (Chap. 348)   Osteoporosis is deﬁned as a reduction of bone mass or
density or the presence of a fragility fracture. Operationally, the WHO deﬁnes osteoporo-sis as a bone density more than 2.5 SD less than the mean for young healthy adults of thesame race and sex. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is the most widely usedstudy to determine bone density. Bone density is expressed as a t-score, that is, the SD be-low the mean of young adults of the same race and gender. A t-score higher than 2.5 char-
acterizes osteoporosis, and a t-score less than 1 identiﬁes patients at risk of osteoporosis.
The z-score compares individuals with those in an age-, race-, and gender- matched pop-
ulation. The ﬁgure shows the relationship between z-scores and t-scores.
X-62. The answer is D.   (Chap. 353)   Hyperuricemia is present in 5% of the population and in
up to 25% of hospitalized patients. The vast majority are at no clinical risk. Hyperuricemiais considered a component of metabolic syndrome; however, this is not an indication totreat elevated urate levels. Instead, an aggressive management strategy to improve lipid lev-els, diabetic control, and other cardiovascular risk factors should be implemented. This pa-tient has multiple reasons for renal insufﬁciency. His asymptomatic hyperuricemia is notone of them; structural kidney damage and stone formation only occur with symptomatichyperuricemia. Treating his urate level will not improve his kidney function nor prevent fu-ture stone formation. It is important to remember that hyperuricemia alone does not rep-resent a disease and is not by itself an indication for treatment. 
FIGURE X-61Z- and T -Scores3BMD Score2
1
20 30 40 50
Age1 SD
1 SD0
60T -Score=-2.5
Z-Score=-1
70 80 901
2
30
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 411
X-63. The answer is B.   (Chap. 352)   Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is one of a collection of
disorders characterized by enzyme dysfunction in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Heme is
synthesized in the bone marrow and liver, and mutations in the gene generally affect one organsystem or the other. For instance, the erythropoietic porphyrias, including porphyria cutaneatarda (PCT), have primarily dermatologic manifestations, whereas AIP is a hepatic porphyriathat presents with intermittent abdominal pain, peripheral neuropathy caused by axonal de-generation, and psychiatric symptoms that include paranoia, depression, anxiety, and halluci-nations. During an attack of AIP , the precursors to heme build up. The diagnosis is made bydemonstrating elevated levels of these precursors, most commonly porphobilinogen, duringthe episode. The porphobilinogen level will drop in the recovery phase and can be normalwhen the patient is well. These patients often have triggers of attacks, including menstruation,steroids, calorie restriction, alcohol, and numerous drugs. PCT, in contrast, is triggered by sun-light, with the development of the classic vesicular rash in exposed areas. PCT is closely associ-ated with mild iron overload, and many of these patients also have hemochromatosis-causingmutations such as HFE C282Y. This mutation, however, is not associated with AIP .
X-64. The answer is E.   (Chap. 335)   Statins have emerged over the last decade as one of the most
clinically important classes of medications. Numerous studies have indicated important ben-eﬁts in both primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Statins act by in-hibiting HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis. Statins aregenerally well tolerated, with an excellent safety proﬁle over the years. However, attentionmust be paid to the side effects, which may be severe. Dyspepsia, headache, fatigue, and myal-gias may occur and are generally well tolerated. Myopathy and rhabdomyolysis are rare butserious side effects. The risk of myopathy is increased in the presence of renal insufﬁciencyand with concomitant use of certain medications, including some antibiotics, antifungalagents, some immunosuppressive drugs, and ﬁbric acid derivatives. Hepatitis is another sideeffect. Liver transaminases should be checked before therapy is started and 4 to 8 weeks after-ward. Elevations more than three times the normal range may mandate stopping therapy.
X-65. The answer is B.   (Chap. 335)   Subacute thyroiditis, also known as de Quervain’s thy-
roiditis, granulomatous thyroiditis, and viral thyroiditis, is characterized clinically by fe-ver, constitutional symptoms, and a painful enlarged thyroid. The etiology is thought to bea viral infection. The peak incidence is between 30 and 50 years of age, and women are af-fected more frequently than are men. The symptoms depend on the phase of the illness.During the initial phase of follicular destruction, there is a release of thyroglobulin andthyroid hormones. As a result, there is increased circulating T
4 and T 3, with concomitant
suppression of TSH. Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis predominate at this point. Radioiodineuptake is low or undetectable. After several weeks, thyroid hormone is depleted and aphase of hypothyroidism ensues, with low unbound T
4 levels and moderate elevations of
TSH. Radioiodine uptake returns to normal. Finally, after 4 to 6 months, thyroid hormoneand TSH levels return to normal as the disease subsides. Patient A is consistent with thethyrotoxic phase of subacute thyroiditis except for the increased radioiodine uptake scan.Patient C is more consistent with Graves’ disease with suppression of TSH, an elevated up-take scan, and elevated thyroid hormones as a result of stimulating immunoglobulin. Pa-tient D is consistent with a neoplasm. Patient E is consistent with central hypothyroidism.
X-66. The answer is D.   (Chap. 339)   The most common cause of hypoglycemia is related to
the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Individuals with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM)have more symptomatic hypoglycemia than individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus(T2DM). On average, those with T1DM experience two episodes of symptomatic hy-poglycemia weekly; and at least once yearly, individuals with T1DM will have a severe ep-isode of hypoglycemia that is at least temporarily disabling. It is estimated that 2–4% ofindividuals with T1DM will die from hypoglycemia. In addition, recurrent episodes ofhypoglycemia in T1DM contribute to the development of hypoglycemia-associated auto-nomic failure. Clinically, this is manifested as hypoglycemia unawareness and defectiveglucose counterregulation, with lack of glucagon and epinephrine secretion as glucoselevels fall. Individuals with T2DM are less likely to develop hypoglycemia. Medications
412 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
that are associated with hypoglycemia in T2DM are insulin and insulin secretagogues,
such as sulfonylureas. Metformin, thiazolidinediones, α-glucosidase inhibitors, gluca-
gon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, and dipeptidyl peptidase-IV inhibitors do not causehypoglycemia.
X-67. The answer is E.   (Chap. 341)   All of the choices have a theoretical efﬁcacy in prevent-
ing pregnancy of >90%. However, the actual effectiveness can vary widely. Spermicideshave the greatest failure rate of 21%. Barrier methods (condoms, cervical cap, dia-phragm) have an actual efﬁcacy between 82 and 88%. Oral contraceptives and intrauter-ine devices perform similarly, with 97% efﬁcacy in preventing pregnancy in clinicalpractice.
X-68 . The answer is D.    (Chap. 338)   Tight glycemic control with a hemoglobin A
1C of 7% or
less has been shown in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) in type 1diabetic patients and the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) in type 2diabetic patients to lead to improvements in microvascular disease. Notably, a decreasedincidence of neuropathy, retinopathy, microalbuminuria, and nephropathy was shown inindividuals with tight glycemic control. Interestingly, glycemic control had no effect onmacrovascular outcomes. Instead, it was blood pressure control to at least moderate goals(142/88 mmHg) in the UKPDS that resulted in a decreased incidence of macrovascularoutcomes, namely, DM-related death, stroke, and heart failure. Improved blood pressurecontrol also resulted in improved microvascular outcomes.
X-69. The answer is E.   (Chap. 335)   Thyroid nodules are found in 5% of patients. Nodules
are more common with age, in women, and in iodine-deﬁcient areas. Given their prev-alence, the cost of screening, and the generally benign course of most nodules, thechoice and order of screening tests have been very contentious. A small percentage ofincidentally discovered nodules will represent thyroid cancer, however. A TSH shouldbe the ﬁrst test to check after detection of a thyroid nodule. A majority of patients willhave normal thyroid function tests. In the case of a normal TSH, ﬁne-needle aspirationor ultrasound-guided biopsy can be pursued. If the TSH is low, a radionuclide scanshould be performed to determine if the nodule is the source of thyroid hyperfunction(a “hot” nodule). In the case above, this is the best course of action. “Hot” nodules canbe treated medically, resected, or ablated with radioactive iodine. “Cold” nodulesshould be further evaluated with a ﬁne-needle aspiration. 4% of nodules undergoingbiopsy will be malignant, 10% are suspicious for malignancy and 86% are indetermi-nate or benign. 
FIGURE X-69 Approach to the pa-
tient with a thyroid nodule. See text
and references for details. *About
one-third of nodules are cystic or
mixed solid-cystic. US, ultrasound;TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone;FNA, ﬁne-needle aspiration
.Solitary or suspicious
  nodule*
Thyroid scan
FNA biopsy
Cyst+ Benign
Consider
  T4 suppression
Monitor by US
Surgery if further growth or suspicious cytologyMalignant
SurgeryNondiagnostic Suspicious or  follicular neoplasmUS-guided  biopsyRepeat bxConsider US  guidance
Repeat bxinadequate ReaspirateConsider US-  guided biopsyFollow by US
Repeat bx once  for benign nodulesCytopathologyAblate, resect,  or Rx medicallyLow TSHNormal TSH
<1 cm or  difficult bx“Hot” nodule
“Cold” or   indeterminate
17% 10% 4% 69%APPROACH TO PT WITH THYROID NODULE
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 413
X-70. The answer is D.   (Chap. 349)   Paget’s disease of bone is relatively common, and the in-
cidence increases with age. An estimated prevalence of 3% in persons over age 40 years is
a generally accepted ﬁgure. Most frequently, the disease is asymptomatic and is diagnosedonly when the typical sclerotic bones are incidentally detected on x-ray examinationsdone for other reasons or when increased alkaline phosphatase activity is recognized dur-ing routine laboratory measurements. The etiology is unknown, but increased bone re-sorption followed by intensive bone repair is thought to be the mechanism that causesincreased bone density and increased serum alkaline phosphatase activity as a marker ofosteoblast activity. Because increased mineralization of bone takes place (although in anabnormal pattern), hypercalcemia is not present unless a severely affected patient be-comes immobilized. Hypercalcemia in fact would be an expected ﬁnding in a patientwith primary hyperparathyroidism, bone metastases, or plasmacytoma, with plasmacy-toma typically producing no increase in alkaline phosphatase activity. Osteomalacia re-sulting from vitamin D deﬁciency is associated with bone pain and hypophosphatemia;normal or decreased serum calcium concentration produces secondary hyperparathy-roidism, further aggravating the defective bone mineralization.
X-71. The answer is E.   (Chap. 349)   Paget’s disease, a disorder characterized by increased os-
teoclastic activity and subsequent bony remodeling with structurally unsound wovenbone, is often diagnosed incidentally when screening tests reveal an increased alkalinephosphatase or when a radiograph displays characteristic abnormalities. Serum calciumand phosphate levels are normal in Paget’s disease. Rarely, immobilization in a patient withPaget’s disease may cause hypercalcemia. The most common symptom of Paget’s disease ispain. Hearing loss is very frequent, usually due to bony compression of the eighth cranialnerve. The most commonly affected areas include the pelvis, the skull, and the vertebralbodies. Diagnosis does not require nuclear bone scan. Physical ﬁndings of bony deformitysuch as frontal bossing of the skull or bowing of an extremity, an elevated alkaline phos-phatase level, or characteristic ﬁndings on plain radiographs, such as cortical thickening,lytic and sclerotic changes sufﬁce. Increased osteoclastic activity, possibly initiated by viralinfection and likely modulated by genetic factors, drives the pathogenesis of Paget’s disease.The disease tends to run in families, with a positive family history in 15–25% of patients. 
X-72. The answer is C.   (Chap. 333)   Cushing’s syndrome is caused by hypercortisolism, typi-
cally from an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenoma, ectopic tumorACTH production, or iatrogenic ingestion of cortisol. Iatrogenic hypercortisolism is themost common cause of cushingoid features. ACTH-secreting adenomas account for 10–15% of all pituitary tumors. Ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors include bronchial and ab-dominal carcinoids, small cell lung cancer, and thymoma. In patients with Cushing’s syn-drome, the frequency of obesity is 80%. Thin skin is also very common and present in upto 80% of patients. Purple skin striae and hirsutism occur 65% of the time in these pa-tients, and amenorrhea about 60% of the time. Skin hyperpigmentation occurs in about20% of patients. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome may also develop hyperglycemia, os-teoporosis, proximal muscle weakness, acne, hirsutism, leukocytosis, lymphopenia, andeosinopenia. Patients die of cardiovascular disease, infections, and suicide.
X-73. The answer is D.   (Chap. 333)   Pituitary adenomas, often called “incidentalomas,” are
commonly discovered on head MRI or CT. At autopsy, unsuspected microadenomas arepresent in up to 25% of cases. In the absence of symptoms or endocrine laboratory ab-normalities, adenomas <1 cm in diameter can be safely monitored with annual MRI.PET-CT is not indicated; laboratory testing is used to evaluate for functional activity.Surgery is not indicated for microadenomas (<1 cm). About one-third of macroade-nomas (>1 cm) will become invasive or exert mass effect; surgery should be consideredfor incidental macroadenomas. 
X-74. The answer is A.   (Chap. 333)   The anterior pituitary produces six major hormones: pro-
lactin, growth hormone (GH), ACTH, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone,and TSH. These hormones are all released in a pulsatile manner from the pituitary. GH andACTH are present in the fetus at 6 and 8 weeks, respectively; the remainder of the anterior
414 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
pituitary hormones appear by week 12 of gestation. All of the hormones have inhibitors that
act in a negative feedback loop to regulate their production and release. Somatostatin, alongwith insulin-like growth factor I, inhibits GH. ACTH is suppressed by glucocorticoids.
X-75. The answer is A.   (Chap. 335)   Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and its cofactor apo CII are re-
quired for the hydrolysis of triglycerides in chylomicrons and very low density lipopro-teins (VLDLs). A genetic deﬁciency of either protein impairs lipolysis and results in anelevation in plasma chylomicrons. VLDL is also elevated. The triglyceride-rich proteinspersist for days in the circulation, causing fasting levels higher than 1000 mg/dL. The in-heritance pattern is autosomal recessive. Heterozygotes have normal or mildly elevatedplasma triglyceride levels. Clinically, these patients may have repeated episodes of pancre-atitis secondary to hypertriglyceridemia. Eruptive xanthomas may appear on the back,the buttocks, and the extensor surfaces of the arms and legs. Hepatosplenomegaly mayresult from the uptake of circulating chylomicrons by the reticuloendothelial cells. Thediagnosis is made by assaying triglyceride lipolytic activity in plasma. Dietary fat restric-tion is the treatment of choice.
X-76. The answer is D.   (Chap. 338)   Diabetic ketoacidosis is an acute complication of diabetes
mellitus. It results from a relative or absolute deﬁciency of insulin combined with a coun-terregulatory hormone excess. In particular, a decrease in the ratio of insulin to glucagonspromotes gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, and the formation of ketone bodies in the liver.Ketosis results from an increase in the release of free fatty acids from adipocytes, with a re-sultant shift toward ketone body synthesis in the liver. This is mediated by the relationshipbetween insulin and the enzyme carnitine palmitoyltransferase I. At physiologic pH, ke-tone bodies exist as ketoacids, which are neutralized by bicarbonate. As bicarbonate storesare depleted, acidosis develops. Clinically, these patients have nausea, vomiting, and ab-dominal pain. They are dehydrated and may be hypotensive. Lethargy and severe centralnervous system depression may occur. The treatment centers on replacement of the body’sinsulin, which will result in cessation of the formation of ketoacids and improvement ofthe acidotic state. Assessment of the level of acidosis may be done with an arterial bloodgas. These patients have an anion gap acidosis and often a concomitant metabolic alkalosisresulting from volume depletion. Volume resuscitation with intravenous ﬂuids is critical.Many electrolyte abnormalities may occur. Patients are total body sodium-, potassium-,and magnesium-depleted. As a result of the acidosis, intracellular potassium may shift outof cells and cause a normal or even elevated potassium level. However, with improvementin the acidosis, the serum potassium rapidly falls. Therefore, potassium repletion is criticaldespite the presence of a “normal” level. Because of the osmolar effects of glucose, ﬂuid isdrawn into the intravascular space. This results in a drop in the measured serum sodium.There is a drop of 1.6 meq/L in serum sodium for each rise of 100 mg/dL in serum glucose.In this case, the serum sodium will improve with hydration alone. The use of 3% saline isnot indicated because the patient has no neurologic deﬁcits, and the expectation is forrapid resolution with intravenous ﬂuids alone.
X-77. The answer is A.   (Chap. 347)   Hypercalcemia manifests in a variety of ways. “Stones,
bones, groans, and psychiatric overtones” often is used on rounds as a way to rememberthe clinical symptoms and signs. Neurologic changes may range from depression to con-fusion and frank coma. These patients often are constipated and may have nausea, vomit-ing, and abdominal pain. Increased calcium may affect the genitourinary tract withnephrolithiasis, renal tubular acidosis, and polyuria. A shortened QT interval may resultin cardiac arrhythmias. 
X-78. The answer is B.   (Chap. 347)   Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is produced by the four
small parathyroid glands that lie posterior to the thyroid gland and is the primary hor-mone responsible for regulating serum calcium and phosphate balance. PTH secretion istightly regulated with negative feedback to the parathyroid glands by serum calcium andvitamin D levels. PTH primarily affects serum calcium and phosphate levels through itsaction in the bone and the kidney. In the bone, PTH increases bone remodeling throughits actions on the osteoblasts and osteoclasts. It directly stimulates osteoblasts to increase
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 415
bone formation, and this action of PTH has been utilized in the treatment of osteoporo-
sis. Its action on osteoclasts, however, is indirect and likely is mediated through its ac-tions on the osteoblasts. The osteoclast has no receptors for PTH. It has beenhypothesized that cytokines produced by osteoblasts are responsible for increased osteo-clastic activity that is seen after PTH administration, as PTH fails to have an effect on os-teoclasts in the absence of osteoblasts. The net effect of PTH on the bone is to increasebone remodeling. Ultimately, this leads to an increase in serum calcium, an effect thatcan be seen within hours of drug administration. In the kidney, PTH acts to increase cal-cium reabsorption while increasing phosphate excretion. At the proximal tubule, PTHacts to decrease phosphate transport, thus facilitating its excretion. Calcium reabsorptionis increased by the action of PTH on the distal tubule. A ﬁnal action of PTH in the kidneyis to increase the production of 1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol, the activated form of vita-min D, through stimulation of 1- α-hydroxylase. Activated vitamin D then helps to in-
crease calcium levels by increasing intestinal absorption of both calcium and phosphate.
X-79. The answer is C.   (Chap. 335)   Iodine deﬁciency is the most common worldwide cause
of hypothyroidism. Autoimmune, or Hashimoto’s, thyroiditis is a common cause in de-veloped countries with dietary iodine supplementation. Histologically, it is characterizedby lymphocytic inﬁltration of the thyroid with activated T cells and B cells. Thyroid celldestruction is thought to be mediated by cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes. Primary hy-pothyroidism is characterized by an elevation in TSH as the feedback inhibition of theanterior pituitary is diminished. However, patients with hypothyroidism may have lowTSH in the setting of secondary hypothyroidism. In this case, a clinical and radiologicevaluation of the pituitary is required. Subclinical hypothyroidism is characterized by ab-normalities in the serum levels of TSH but minimal symptoms and often minimal changein the free T
4 level. The rate of development of overt, symptomatic hypothyroidism is
about 4% per year, especially in the case of positive TPO antibodies, which are present in90 to 95% of patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism.
X-80. The answer is B.   (Chap. 336)   Primary hyperaldosteronism is suggested by diastolic hy-
pertension without edema, hyposecretion of renin that fails to increase appropriatelyduring volume depletion, and hypersecretion of aldosterone that fails to suppress in re-sponse to volume expansion. When signs of hyperaldosteronism are present without asolitary adenoma, these patients have bilateral cortical nodular hyperplasia or nodularhyperplasia. One distinguishing feature between these two conditions is the lack of severehypokalemia in patients with cortical nodular hyperplasia. After potassium supplemen-tation, patients with cortical nodular hyperplasia, but not patients with primary hyperal-dosteronism, may have normal potassium levels. A low-renin state is characteristic ofhyperaldosteronism. Conn’s syndrome is deﬁned by an aldosterone-secreting adrenal ad-enoma. Liddle’s syndrome resembles hyperaldosteronism clinically and biochemicallyexcept that aldosterone levels are low or normal in patients with Liddle’s syndrome. Thedefect in Liddle’s syndrome is due to dysregulation of an epithelial Na
+ channel. A rare
form of hyperaldosteronism, glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism, resembles corti-cal nodular hyperplasia. Whereas dexamethasone suppression does not affect aldosteronelevels in patients with cortical nodular hyperplasia, profound suppression is seen in pa-tients with glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism.
X-81. The answer is A.   (Chap. 343)   Turner syndrome most frequently results from a 45,X
karyotype, but mosaicism (45,X/46,XX) also can result in this disorder. Clinically, Turnersyndrome manifests as short stature and primary amenorrhea if presenting in youngadulthood. In addition, chronic lymphedema of the hands and feet, nuchal folds, a lowhairline, and high arched palate are also common features. T o diagnose Turner syn-drome, karyotype analysis should be performed. A Barr body results from inactivation ofone of the X chromosomes in women and is not seen in males. In Turner syndrome, theBarr body should be absent, but only 50% of individuals with Turner syndrome have the45,X karyotype. Thus, the diagnosis could be missed in those with mosaicism or otherstructural abnormalities of the X chromosome.
416 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
Multiple comorbid conditions are found in individuals with Turner syndrome, and ap-
propriate screening is recommended. Congenital heart defects affect 30% of women with
Turner syndrome, including bicuspid aortic valve, coarctation of the aorta, and aorticroot dilatation. An echocardiogram should be performed, and the individual should beassessed with blood pressures in the arms and legs. Hypertension can also be associatedwith structural abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract, most commonly horseshoekidney. A renal ultrasound is also recommended. Autoimmune thyroid disease affects15–30% of women with Turner syndrome and should be assessed by screening TSH.Other comorbidities that may occur include sensorineural hearing loss, elevated liverfunction enzymes, osteoporosis, and celiac disease.
X-82. The answer is B.   (Chap. 341)   Pathologic gynecomastia develops when the effective ratio
of testosterone to estrogen ratio is decreased owing to diminished testosterone production(as in primary testicular failure) or increased estrogen production. The latter may arisefrom direct estradiol secretion by a testis stimulated by LH or hCG or from an increase inperipheral aromatization of precursor steroids, most notably androstenedione. Elevatedandrostenedione levels may result from increased secretion by an adrenal tumor (leadingto an elevated level of urinary 17-ketosteroids) or decreased hepatic clearance in patientswith chronic liver disease. A variety of drugs, including diethylstilbestrol, heroin, digitalis,spironolactone, cimetidine, isoniazid, and tricyclic antidepressants, also can cause gyneco-mastia. In this patient, the history of paternity and the otherwise normal physical exami-nation indicate that a karyotype is unnecessary, and the bilateral breast enlargementessentially excludes the presence of carcinoma and thus the need for biopsy. The presenceof a low LH and testosterone suggests either estrogen or hCG production. Because of thenormal testicular examination, a primary testicular tumor is not suspected. Carcinoma ofthe lung and germ cell tumors both can produce hCG, causing gynecomastia.
X-83. The answer is E.   (Chap. 74)   Obesity leads to a major increase in morbidity and mortal-
ity. Individuals who are more than 150% of their ideal body weight have as much as a 12-fold increase in mortality. Insulin resistance leading to diabetes mellitus is one of the mostprominent features of obesity. The vast majority of patients with type 2 diabetes are obese.Weight loss to a moderate degree may be associated with improvements in insulin sensitiv-ity. Obesity is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Obesity is associatedwith hypertension. The impact of obesity on cardiovascular mortality may be seen in per-sons with BMIs above 25. Obesity is associated with an increased incidence of cholesterolstones. Periodic fasting may increase the supersaturation of bile by decreasing the phospho-lipid component. Multiple studies have indicated increased mortality from cancer in obeseindividuals. Some of this increase may result from the increased conversion of androstene-dione to estrone in adipose tissue. Obesity decreases chest wall compliance. Restrictive lungdefects may occur in these individuals. Sleep apnea and obesity hypoventilation syndromemay occur. Although obesity may be associated with obstructive sleep apnea, it is not typi-cally associated with other forms of chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD).
X-84. The answer is C.   (Chap. 349)   Paget disease is a disorder of bone remodeling that affects
multiple areas of the skeleton. The prevalence increases with age, and it is more commonin men than women. There is wide variation in global prevalence; Western Europe andNorth America are disproportionately and heavily affected. In autopsy series, 3% of thoseover the age of 40 have evidence of disease. For reasons that are not clear, the frequency ofdisease appears to be declining over the past 20 years. A majority of patients with Pagetdisease are asymptomatic. The etiology of the disease is unknown, though both geneticand environmental factors have been implicated. The central pathophysiology is driven byoveractive and overabundant osteoclasts, which erode bone. Accelerated bone formationfrom recruited osteoblasts leads to woven, poorly structured bone that is prone to fractureand bowing. A viral etiology has been postulated, based on ﬁndings of viral inclusion bod-ies and viral mRNA in osteoclasts of patients with Paget disease. T o date no full-length vi-ral genes have been recovered, and virus has never been cultured from Pagetic bone.
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 417
X-85. The answer is D.   (Chap. 347)   FHH is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. It re-
sults from a defect in serum calcium sensing by the parathyroid gland and renal tubule,
causing inappropriate secretion of PTH and excessive renal reabsorption of calcium. Thecalcium-sensing receptor is sensitive to extracellular calcium concentration, suppressingPTH secretion and therefore resulting in negative-feedback regulation. Many differentmutations in the calcium-sensing receptor have been described in patients with FHH.These mutations lower the ability of the sensor to bind calcium, resulting in excessive se-cretion of PTH and subsequent hypercalcemia. Urinary excretion of calcium is very low,with reabsorption more than 99%. The hypercalcemia is often detected in the ﬁrst decadeof life. This contrasts with primary hyperparathyroidism, which rarely occurs before age10. Few clinical signs or symptoms are present in patients with FHH. These patients haveexcellent outcomes, and surgery or medical therapy is rarely necessary. Jansen’s diseaserefers to mutations in the PTH receptor.
X-86. The answer is A.   (Chap. 354)   Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused
by mutations in the ATP7B  gene, which leads to copper accumulation and toxicity. The
ATP7B  gene encodes a membrane-bound copper-transporting ATPase. Deﬁciency of this
protein leads to decreased biliary copper excretion and resultant buildup of copper in thetissues. The two most affected organs are the liver and the brain. Patients may present withhepatitis, cirrhosis, hepatic failure, movement disorders, or psychiatric disorders. Serumcopper levels are usually lower than normal due to low blood ceruloplasmin, which usu-ally binds serum copper. About 1% of the population are carriers of an ATP7B  mutation;
the disease is present in 1 in 30,000–40,000. The disease is close to 100% penetrant and re-quires treatment in almost all cases. DNA haplotype analysis can be used to genotype sib-lings of an affected patient. Patients are treated with zinc, which induces a negative copperbalance by blocking intestinal absorption; trientine, which acts as a potent copper chela-tor; or both. Severe hepatic decompensation may require liver transplantation.
X-87.  and . X-88.    The answers are E and E.   (Chap. 344)   In patients with a nonmetastatic carci-
noid, surgery is the only potentially curative therapy. The extent of surgical resection de-pends on the size of the primary tumor because the risk of metastasis is related to the sizeof the tumor. Symptomatic treatment is aimed at decreasing the amount and effect of cir-culating substances. Drugs that inhibit the serotonin 5-HT
1 and 5-HT 2 receptors (methy-
sergide, cyproheptadine, ketanserin) may control diarrhea but not ﬂushing. 5-HT 3
receptor antagonists (odansetron, tropisetron, alosetron) control nausea and diarrhea inup to 100% of these patients and may alleviate ﬂushing. A combination of histamine H
1
and H 2 receptor antagonists may control ﬂushing, particularly in patients with foregut
carcinoid tumors. Somatostatin analogues (octreotide, lanreotide) are the most effectiveand widely used agents to control the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome, decreasing uri-nary 5-HIAA excretion and symptoms in 70 to 80% of patients. Interferon α, alone or
combined with hepatic artery embolization, controls ﬂushing and diarrhea in 40 to 85%of these patients. Phenoxybenzamine is an α
1-adrenergic receptor blocker that is used in
the treatment of pheochromocytoma.
Carcinoid crisis is a life-threatening complication of carcinoid syndrome. It is most
common in patients with intense symptoms from foregut tumors or markedly high levelsof urinary 5-HIAA. The crisis may be provoked by surgery, stress, anesthesia, chemother-apy, or physical trauma to the tumor (biopsy or, in this case, physical compression of liverlesions). These patients develop severe typical symptoms plus systemic symptoms such ashypotension and hypertension with tachycardia. Synthetic analogues of somatostatin(octreotide, lanreotide) are the treatment of choice for carcinoid crisis. They are also ef-fective in preventing crises when administered before a known inciting event. Octreotide150 to 250 µg subcutaneously every 6 to 8 h should be started 24 to 48 h before a proce-dure that is likely to precipitate a carcinoid crisis.
X-89. The answer is E.   (Chap. 348)   Multiple treatment choices are available to prevent frac-
tures and reverse bone loss in osteoporosis, and the side-effect proﬁles should be care-fully considered when making the appropriate choice for this patient. Risedronate
418 X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS
belongs to a family of drugs called bisphosphonates. Bisphosphonates act to inhibit os-
teoclast activity to decrease bone resorption and increase bone mass. Alendronate,risedronate, and ibandronate are approved for treatment of postmenopausal osteopo-rosis, and alendronate and risedronate are also approved for the treatment of steroid-induced osteoporosis and osteoporosis in men. In clinical trials, risedronate decreasesrisk of hip and vertebral fracture by 40–50% over 3 years. However, risedronate is noteffective in decreasing hip fracture in women over the age of 80. The major side effectof bisphosphonate compounds taken orally is esophagitis. These drugs should be takenwith a full glass of water, and the patient should remain upright for 30 min after takingthe drug. Estrogens are also effective in preventing and treating osteoporosis. Epidemi-ologic data indicate that women taking estrogen have a 50% decreased risk of hip frac-ture. Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM). The effect ofraloxifene on bone density is somewhat less than that of estrogen, but it does decreasethe risk of vertebral fracture by 30–50%. However, both drugs are contraindicated inthis patient because of the recent occurrence of venous thromboembolic disease. Bothestrogen and SERMs increase the risk of DVT and pulmonary embolus several-fold. Ifestrogen is to be used, it should be used in combination with a progestin compound inwomen with an intact uterus to decrease the risk of uterine cancer associated with un-opposed estrogen stimulation. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are recom-mended, but given the degree of osteoporosis are inadequate alone. Calcitonin isavailable as an intranasal spray a1nd produces small increases in bone density, but ithas no proven effectiveness on prevention of fractures.
X-90. The answer is B.   (Chap. 333)   Hyperprolactinemia is the most common pituitary hor-
mone secretion syndrome in men and women. Prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas(prolactinomas) are the most common cause of high prolactin levels. Hyperprolactine-mia has a wide array of etiologies. Pregnancy and lactation are physiologic causes of in-creased prolactin levels. Chronic renal failure increases prolactin levels by decreasingclearance. Nipple stimulation and sexual orgasm both can increase prolactin release intothe blood. Chest wall trauma, including surgery and herpes zoster infection, can induceprolactin secretion likely by activating a reﬂex suckling arc. Primary hypothyroidism cancause mild hyperprolactinemia due to compensatory thyrotropin-releasing hormone se-cretion. Many drugs including dopamine receptor blockers (phenothiazines, haloperidol,metoclopramide), opiates, H
2 blockers, serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ﬂuoxetine), verap-
amil, estrogens, and antiestrogens are associated with prolactin hypersecretion. Hyper-thyroidism is not associated with increased prolactin levels.
X-91. The answer is A.   (Chap. 345)   This patient’s clinical scenario is most consistent with
MEN 1, or the “3 Ps”: parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreas. MEN 1 is an autosomaldominant genetic syndrome characterized by neoplasia of the parathyroid, pituitary,and pancreatic islet cells. Hyperparathyroidism is the most common manifestation ofMEN 1. The neoplastic changes affect multiple parathyroid glands, making surgical caredifﬁcult. Pancreatic islet cell neoplasia is the second most common manifestation ofMEN 1. Increased pancreatic islet cell hormones include pancreatic polypeptide, gas-trin, insulin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, glucagons, and somatostatin. Pancreatic tu-mors may be multicentric, and up to 30% are malignant, with the liver being the ﬁrstsite of metastases. The symptoms depend on the type of hormone secreted. Elevations ofgastrin result in the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). Gastrin levels are elevated, re-sulting in an ulcer diathesis. Conservative therapy is often unsuccessful. Insulinoma re-sults in documented hypoglycemia with elevated insulin and C-peptide levels.Glucagonoma results in hyperglycemia, skin rash, anorexia, glossitis, and diarrhea. Ele-vations in vasoactive intestinal peptide result in profuse watery diarrhea. Pituitary tu-mors occur in up to half of patients with MEN 1. Prolactinomas are the most common.The multicentricity of the tumors makes resection difﬁcult. Growth hormone–secretingtumors are the next most common, with ACTH- and corticotropin-releasing hormone(CRH)-secreting tumors being more rare. Carcinoid tumors may also occur in the thy-mus, lung, stomach, and duodenum.
X. E NDOCRINOLOGY AND  METABOLISM  — ANSWERS 419
X-92. The answer is C.   (Chap. 350)   This patient has nephrotic syndrome, which is likely a re-
sult of multiple myeloma. The hyperlipidemia of nephrotic syndrome appears to be due
to a combination of increased hepatic production and decreased clearance of very lowdensity lipoproteins, with increased LDL production. It is usually mixed but can manifestas hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia. Effective treatment of the underlyingrenal disease normalizes the lipid proﬁle. Of the choices presented, HMG-CoA reductaseinhibitors would be the most effective to reduce this patient’s LDL. Dietary managementis an important component of lifestyle modiﬁcation but seldom results in a >10% fall inLDL. Niacin and ﬁbrates would be indicated if the triglycerides were higher, but the LDLis the more important lipid abnormality to address at this time. Lipid apheresis is re-served for patients who cannot tolerate the lipid-lowering drugs or who have a geneticlipid disorder refractory to medication. Cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibitors havebeen shown to raise high-density lipoprotein levels and their role in the treatment of li-poproteinemias is still under investigation.
X-93. The answer is B.   (Chap. 336)   Incidental adrenal masses are often discovered during ra-
diographic testing for another condition and are found in ~6% of adult subjects at au-topsy. Fifty percent of patients with a history of malignancy and a newly discoveredadrenal mass will actually have an adrenal metastasis. Fine-needle aspiration of a sus-pected metastatic malignancy will often be diagnostic. In the absence of a suspected non-adrenal malignancy, most adrenal incidentalomas are benign. Primary adrenalmalignancies are uncommon (<0.01%), and ﬁne-needle aspiration is not useful to dis-tinguish between benign and malignant primary adrenal tumors. Although 90% of thesemasses are nonsecretory, patients with an incidentaloma should be screened for pheo-chromocytoma and hypercortisolism with plasma free metanephrines and an overnightdexamethasone suppression test, respectively. When radiographic features suggest a be-nign neoplasm (<3 cm), scanning should be repeated in 3–6 months. When masses are>6 cm, surgical removal (if more likely primary adrenal malignancy) or ﬁne-needle aspi-ration (if more likely metastatic malignancy) is preferred. 
X-94. The answer is C.   (Chap. 338; Nathan, N Engl J Med 328:1676–1685, 1993.)    Nephropa-
thy is a leading cause of death in diabetic patients. Diabetic nephropathy may be function-ally silent for 10 to 15 years. Clinically detectable diabetic nephropathy begins with thedevelopment of microalbuminuria (30 to 300 mg of albumin per 24 h). The glomerular ﬁl-tration rate actually may be elevated at this stage. Only after the passage of additional timewill the proteinuria be overt enough (0.5 g/L) to be detectable on standard urine dipsticks.Microalbuminuria precedes nephropathy in patients with both non-insulin-dependent andinsulin-dependent diabetes. An increase in kidney size also may accompany the initial hy-perﬁltration stage. Once the proteinuria becomes signiﬁcant enough to be detected by dip-stick, a steady decline in renal function occurs, with the glomerular ﬁltration rate falling anaverage of 1 mL/min per month. Therefore, azotemia begins about 12 years after the diag-nosis of diabetes. Hypertension clearly is an exacerbating factor for diabetic nephropathy.
X-95. The answer is C.   (Chap. 353)   Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is characterized by complete ab-
sence of the enzyme hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), a component ofpurine metabolism that is related to purine recycling into guanosine monophosphateand inosine monophosphate. Hyperuricemia develops from urate overproduction. Thegene for HPRT is located on the X-chromosome, so Lesch-Nyhan disease is transmittedas an X-linked disorder. Homozygous males have the disease, and heterozygous carrierfemales are asymptomatic. Therefore, the daughter of a carrier has a 50% chance of beinga carrier and a son has a 50% chance of having the disease. Carrier females do not have anincreased risk of gout or urate nephropathy. Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is characterized byhyperuricemia, gouty arthritis, nephrolithiasis, self-mutilative behavior, choreoathetosis,and mental retardation. Treatment of affected patients with allopurinol will eliminate orprevent the problems related to hyperuricemia but will not have any beneﬁcial effect onthe behavioral or neurologic manifestations. Since it is an X-linked disorder, screeningthe husband has no value.
This page intentionally left blank 
421XI. NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
XI-1.   Delirium, an acute confusional state, is a common
disorder that remains a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in the United States. Which patient is at thehighest risk for developing delirium?
A. A 36-year-old man admitted to the medical ward
with a deep venous thrombosis
B. A 55-year-old man postoperative day 2 from a total
colectomy
C. A 68-year-old woman admitted to the intensive care
unit (ICU) with esophageal rupture
D. A 74-year-old woman in the preoperative clinic be-
fore hip surgery
E. An 84-year-old man living in an assisted living facility
XI-2.   A 46-year-old man presents for evaluation of severe
unilateral headache. He states that he has had episodes of
intermittent headache for the past 3 years. He describesthe headaches as a stabbing pain located near his righttemple. They occur abruptly and last up to 3 h at a time,during which he feels incapacitated, rating the pain as a10 out of 10. Most of the time, the headaches begin in theearly morning hours. When they occur, he ﬁnds it impos-sible to sleep. He feels that rubbing his head improves thepain but has noticed no other factors that relieve the pain.Speciﬁcally, he has had no improvement with acetamino-phen, naprosyn, or oxycodone. When the headaches oc-cur, he develops nasal congestion and tearing on the sideof the pain. He believes the headaches occur in cycles. Hewill have the headaches almost daily for up to 2 weeks at atime, but then have no headaches at all for as long as 3months. He has decided to seek medical advice becausehe is worried about the possibility of a brain tumor be-cause of the severity of the headaches. He takes no medi-cines regularly. His vital signs and physical examinationare normal. What is the best approach to treatment ofthese headaches?
A. Fluticasone nasal spray and loratadine, 10 mg orally
B. Indomethacin, 25 mg three times dailyC. Oxygen at 10–12 L/min by nasal cannula at the on-
set of an attackD. Sumatriptan, 50 mg orally, at the onset of an attackE. Surgical consultation for microvascular decompres-
sion of the trigeminal nerve
XI-3.   Y ou are seeing your patient with polymyositis in fol-
low-up. He has been taking prednisone at high doses for 2months, and you initiated mycophenolate mofetil at thelast clinic visit for a steroid-sparing effect. He began asteroid taper 2 weeks ago. His symptoms were predomi-nantly in the lower extremities and face, and he has im-proved considerably. He no longer needs a cane and hisvoice has returned to normal. Laboratory data show acreatine kinase (CK) of 1300 U/L, which is unchangedfrom 2 months ago. What is the most appropriate nextstep in this patient’s management?
A. Continue current management
B. Continue high-dose steroids with no taperC. Switch mycophenolate to methotrexateD. Repeat muscle biopsy
XI-4.   A patient complains of numbness in his neck. Over
months, the numbness has become more pronouncedand involves a dense area bilaterally from the sternalnotch to the area behind the ear. On examination, scalpsensation, cranial nerve function, and upper extremitymotor examination are normal. The patient has de-creased pain and temperature sensation in the distribu-tion of C4. Vibration sense is normal. Cranial and caudalto the affected area, sensation is intact. Bladder and analsphincter function are also normal. What is the mostlikely cause of this patient’s neurologic disorder?
A. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
B. Disc herniationC. Intramedullary tumorD. Knife or bullet injuryE. Neurosyphilis
XI-5.   A 56-year-old male is admitted to the intensive care unit
with a hypertensive crisis after cocaine use. Initial bloodpressure is 245/132. On physical examination the patient isXI-2. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
422 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
unresponsive except to painful stimuli. He has been intu-
bated for airway protection and is being mechanically venti-lated, with a respiratory rate of 14. His pupils are reactive tolight, and there are normal corneal, cough, and gag reﬂexes.The patient has a dense left hemiparesis. When presentedwith painful stimuli, the patient responds with ﬂexure pos-turing on the right side. Computed tomography (CT) re-veals a large area of intracranial bleeding in the rightfrontoparietal area. Over the next several hours the patientdeteriorates. The most recent examination reveals a bloodpressure of 189/100. The patient now has a dilated pupil onthe right side. The patient continues to have corneal re-ﬂexes. Y ou suspect rising intracranial pressure related to theintracranial bleed. All but which of the following can bedone to decrease the patient’s intracranial pressure?
A. Administer intravenous mannitol at a dose of 1 g/kg
body weight.
B. Administer hypertonic ﬂuids to achieve a goal so-
dium level of 155 to 160 meq/L.
C. Consult neurosurgery for an urgent ventriculostomy.
D. Initiate intravenous nitroprusside to decrease the
mean arterial pressure to a goal of 100 mmHg.
E. Increase the respiratory rate to 30.
XI-6.    What percentage of cigarette smokers will die prema-
turely if they are unable to quit?
A. 2%
B. 10%C. 40%D. 70%
XI-7.    For the last 5 weeks a 35-year-old female has had epi-
sodes of intense vertigo that last several hours. Each epi-sode is associated with tinnitus and a sense of fullness inthe right ear; during the attacks she prefers to lie on theleft side. Examination during an attack shows that she hasﬁne rotary nystagmus that is maximal on gaze to the left.There are no ocular palsies, cranial nerve signs, or long-tract signs. An audiogram shows high-tone hearing lossin the right ear, with recruitment but no tone decay. Themost likely diagnosis in this case is
A. labyrinthitis
B. Ménière’s disease
C. vertebral-basilar insufﬁciencyD. acoustic neuromaE. multiple sclerosis
XI-8.    Lumbar puncture should be preceded by CT or MRI
in all of the following subsets of patients suspected ofhaving meningitis except  those with:
A. depressed consciousnessB. focal neurologic abnormalityC. known central nervous system (CNS) mass lesionD. positive Kernig’s signE. recent head traumaXI-9.   Y ou are a physician practicing in a small community
in the Rocky Mountains near Aspen, Colorado. A 33-year-old female comes to your ofﬁce for evaluation of abilateral tingling sensation in the ﬁngertips. She describesthe sensation as affecting all the ﬁngers on both hands.She has no medical problems and takes no medications.She is a vegetarian and is visiting the area from San Diego,California. She denies any other symptoms, includingheadache, nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, and uri-nary frequency. On physical examination the patient hasa normal sensory examination, including reaction to lighttouch and pinprick and vibratory sensation. She is able tostand normally with the arms extended and the eyesclosed. A cerebellar examination reveals normal ﬁnger-to-nose testing and no dysdiadochokinesis. Her gait isnormal, including tandem gait, toe walking, and heelwalking. What would you recommend as the next step?
A. Blood tests for serum vitamin B
12
B. Fasting blood glucose level
C. ReassuranceD. Serologic testing for syphilisE. Treatment with acetazolamide for altitude sickness
XI-10.   Y ou are doing rounds and see a patient admitted with
weakness. He is a 46-year-old man who noticed the acuteonset of facial weakness and slurred speech 1 day prior topresentation. At the onset of his symptoms, he also com-plained of right arm weakness and double vision. He wentto bed and woke up the next morning without any residualneurologic deﬁcits. He came to the emergency departmentfor evaluation. On examination of the patient on eveningrounds, you note 3/5 weakness in the upper and lower ex-tremities, with increasing weakness with exertion. He hasintact phonation and mental status, but you also note adisconjugate gaze. He denies any pain. Sensation is intact.What is the most likely location of his neurologic disease?
A. Brainstem
B. MuscleC. Neuromuscular junctionD. Peripheral nerveE. Spinal root
XI-11.   A 34-year-old female complains of lower extremity
weakness for the last 3 days. She has noted progressiveweakness in the lower extremities with loss of sensation“below the belly button” and incontinence. She had hadsome low-grade fevers for the last week. She denies recenttravel. Past medical history is unremarkable. Physical ex-amination is notable for a sensory level at the level of theumbilicus. The lower extremities show +3/5 strength bi-laterally proximally and distally. Reﬂexes, cerebellar exam-ination, and mental status are normal. All the followingare appropriate steps in evaluating this patient except
A. antinuclear antibodiesB. electromyographyC. lumbar punctureXI-5. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 423
D. MRI of the spine
E. viral serologies
XI-12.   Which clinical signs would you expect in a 53-year-
old man with gait ataxia and these MRI ﬁndings (seeFigure XI-12)?
A. Gait instability, urinary incontinence, dementia
B. Hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresisC. Migraine headache, limb weakness, breathing difﬁ-
culties
D. Scanning speech, oscillatory tremor of the head,
nystagmus
XI-13.   A 17-year-old adolescent is seen in clinic several
weeks after he suffered a concussion during a high-schoolfootball game. At the time of the event, paramedics re-ported that he experienced no loss of consciousness butwas confused for a period of about 10 min. Head imagingwas normal. He describes a generalized headache that ispresent all the time since his trauma, and he occasionallyfeels dizzy. His mother is concerned that he is having ahard time concentrating in school and seems depressed toher lately; she describes him as very energetic prior to hisconcussion. The patient’s physical examination is entirelynormal except for a somewhat ﬂattened affect. Which ofthe following statements regarding his condition is true?
A. He has an excellent prognosis.
B. He meets criteria for postconcussive syndrome and
should improve over 1–2 months.
C. He should avoid contact sports for the next month.D. He is most likely malingering.E. Low-dose narcotics should be started for headache.
XI-14.   Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) has been
diagnosed in which of the following populations?A. Family members with well-deﬁned germ-line muta-
tions leading to autosomal dominant inheritance ofa fatal neurodegenerative disease
B. New Guinea natives practicing cannibalismC. Patients accidentally inoculated with infected mate-
rial during surgical procedures
D. Worldwide, in sporadic cases mostly during the ﬁfth
and sixth decades of life
E. Y oung adults in Europe thought to have been ex-
posed to tainted beef products
XI-15.    A 44-year-old man with a history of hypertension
and Paget’s disease has had lower back pain for the past 3months. The pain is worse with standing and improveswith sitting. Walking does not necessarily exacerbate hissymptoms. He has no leg or buttock pain. On examina-tion, he has mild weakness on the right at the hip ﬂexors,knee extenders, and knee ﬂexors and more distally to thesame degree. Reﬂexes are diminished in the right lower ex-tremity. He has no sensory ﬁndings in the lower extremi-ties or in the perineum. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Intervertebral disk herniation
B. Lumbar spinal stenosisC. Metastatic malignancyD. Occlusive aortoiliac atherosclerosisE. T ethered cord syndrome
XI-16.    On the neurologic consultation service, you are
asked to evaluate a patient with mesial temporal lobe epi-lepsy syndrome. The patient has a history of intractablecomplex partial seizures that rarely generalize. Her sei-zures often begin with an aura and commonly manifest asbehavioral arrests, complex automatisms, and unilateralposturing. MRI ﬁndings include small temporal lobesand a small hippocampus with increased signal on T2-weighted sequences. Which of these additional historicfactors are also likely to be present in this patient?
A. History of febrile seizures
B. HypothyroidismC. NeuroﬁbromasD. Recurring genital ulcersE. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
XI-17.    The patient in the preceding scenario was admitted
with refractory seizures. Y ou are asked to see the patientand offer treatment options. What treatment option willbe the most efﬁcacious in a patient with mesial temporallobe epilepsy (MTLE) syndrome?
A. Acyclovir
B. AmygdalohippocampectomyC. LevetiracetamD. PrimidoneE. Vagus nerve stimulation
XI-18.    The deep tendon reﬂex requires all of the following
structures to be functional except
FIGURE XI-12
XI-14. (Continued) XI-11. (Continued)
424 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
A. α motor neurons
B. γ motor neurons
C. pyramidal neurons 
D. spindle afferent neurons
XI-19.    The most common presenting ﬁnding or symptom
of multiple sclerosis is
A. internuclear ophthalmoplegia
B. transverse myelitisC. cerebellar ataxiaD. optic neuritisE. urinary retention
XI-20.    Y ou are evaluating a patient with neck pain and you
suspect cervical degenerative disk disease based on thehistory. Based on the most common ﬁndings with cervi-cal disk disease, which ﬁnding do you expect when youexamine this patient?
A. Biceps weakness
B. Decreased light touch sensation in the axilla and
medial arm
C. Decreased pin-prick sensation over the lateral deltoidD. Weak ﬁnger ﬂexors
XI-21.    A 64-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
department by her family complaining of weakness. Thepatient reports difﬁculty walking and frequent falls. Shealso has blurry vision bilaterally. She denies light headed-ness or vertigo. These symptoms have been present for atleast the past 9 months and are getting progressively worse.She has great difﬁculty walking from the waiting room tothe examination room but is not dizzy while doing so. Onfurther questioning she denies numbness or tingling. Onphysical examination, her cranial nerves are intact, andstrength examination shows 5 out of 5 strength in both up-per and lower extremities. Reﬂexes are normal throughout.Light touch sensation is normal, and she is not orthostatic.Y ou order a noncontrast head CT and it is read as normal.Which test is most likely to reveal the correct diagnosis?
A. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid viral polymerase chain reaction
B. Lithium levelC. Rapid plasma reagent (RPR)D. Serum alcohol levelE. Vitamin B
12 deﬁciency
XI-22.    A 78-year-old female with a long history of vascular
disease presents after an embolic cerebrovascular accident(CV A) with severe and unrelenting pain on the right side. Shedescribes the pain as burning as if she had been bathed inacid. Where is the most likely site of the recent embolic CV A?
A. Frontal lobe
B. HypothalamusC. PonsD. T emporal lobeE. ThalamusXI-23.   Y ou are counseling your patient on the need to quit
smoking cigarettes. She has been smoking for over twodecades and wants to quit in order to avoid the harmfulphysical effects of smoking. Wanting to take “baby steps,”she has switched to low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes.Which of the following statements is true about the po-tential beneﬁt of switching to these low-yield cigarettes?
A. Fewer smoking-drug interactions are found among
smokers of low-yield cigarettes.
B. Most smokers inhale the same amount of nicotine
and tar even if they switch to low-yield cigarettes.
C. Smoking low-yield cigarettes decreases the harmful
cardiovascular effects of cigarette smoking.
D. Smoking low-yield cigarettes is a reasonable alternative
to complete smoking cessation for chronic smokers.
XI-24.   A 34-year-old man complains of 1 week of dizziness,
vertigo, tinnitus, and right-sided gait ataxia. Electronys-
tagmography (calorics) with sequential administration ofwarm and cold water into the ear canal is performed. Onthe left, cold water causes right-beating nystagmus andwarm water causes left-beating nystagmus. On the rightear, there is no response to the cold caloric. What is thecause of this patient’s dizziness and vertigo?
A. Acoustic neuroma
B. Aminoglycoside antibioticsC. Cerebellar ischemiaD. Otoconia (ear otoliths)
XI-25.   A 49-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a
seizure. He does not have a history of seizures and he cur-rently takes no medications. He has AIDS and is not un-der any care at this time. His physical examination ismost notable for small, shoddy lymphadenopathy in thecervical region. A head CT shows a ring-enhancing lesionin the right temporal lobe, with edema but no mass effect.A lumbar puncture shows no white or red blood cells,and the Gram stain is negative. His serum Toxoplasma
IgG is positive. Which of the following is the best courseof action for this patient at this time?
A. Biopsy of the central nervous system (CNS) lesion
B. DexamethasoneC. Search for systemic malignancyD. Treatment for CNS toxoplasmosisE. Whole-brain radiation therapy
XI-26.   The patient in the preceding scenario returns for re-
evaluation after 2 weeks of appropriate therapy. The CNSlesion has not changed in size, and he has not had anymore seizures. All microbiologic cultures and viral stud-ies, including Epstein-Barr virus DNA from the cere-brospinal ﬂuid are negative. What is the best course ofaction for this patient at this time?
A. Continue treatment for CNS toxoplasmosis
B. DexamethasoneC. Intravenous acyclovirXI-18. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 425
D. Stereotactic brain biopsy
E. Whole-brain radiation therapy
XI-27.   Which of the following statements about syringo-
myelia is true?
A. More than half the cases are associated with Chiari
malformations.
B. Symptoms typically begin in middle age.
C. Vibration and position sensation are usually dimin-
ished.
D. Syrinx cavities are always congenital.E. Neurosurgical decompression is usually effective in
relieving the symptoms.
XI-28.   A 34-year-old female complains of weakness and
double vision for the last 3 weeks. She has also noted achange in her speech, and her friends tell her that she is“more nasal.” She has noticed decreased exercise toler-ance and difﬁculty lifting objects and getting out of achair. The patient denies pain. The symptoms are worseat the end of the day and with repeated muscle use. Y oususpect myasthenia gravis. All the following are useful inthe diagnosis of myasthenia gravis except
A. acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibodies
B. edrophoniumC. electrodiagnostic testingD. muscle-speciﬁc kinase (MuSK) antibodiesE. voltage-gated calcium channel antibodies
XI-29.   A 49-year-old woman presents for a second opinion
regarding symptoms of tremors, difﬁculty with ambula-tion, and periodic ﬂushing. Her symptoms originally began~3 years ago. At that time, she was hospitalized for a synco-pal episode, after which she was told to increase her salt in-take. Since then, she has had progressive motor difﬁcultiesincluding bilateral tremors and a stiff slow gait. She also hashad several more episodes of syncope. She states that sheknows when these syncopal events will occur because shefeels faint and weak. She has never had an injury from syn-cope. A ﬁnal recent symptom has been periodic ﬂushingand sweating. A neurologist previously diagnosed her withParkinson’s disease and prescribed therapy with ropinirole.Despite increasing doses, she does not feel improved, butrather has recently noticed uncontrollable movements thatshe describes at tics of her face. Her only other medical his-tory is recent recurrent urinary tract infections. Her medi-cations are ropinirole, 24 mg daily, and nitrofurantoin, 100mg daily. She reports no history of drug use. On physicalexamination, her blood pressure is 130/70 mmHg with aheart rate of 78 beats/min while sitting. Upon standing, herblood pressure drops to 90/50 mmHg with a heart rate of110 beats/min. Her ocular movements are full and intact.She has recurrent motor movements of the right side of herface. Her neurologic examination shows increased muscletone in the lower extremities with bilateral 4-Hz tremor.Deep tendon reﬂexes are brisk and 3+ in upper and lowerextremities. Three beats of myoclonus is present at the an-kles bilaterally. She walks with a spastic gait. Strength isnormal. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Corticobasal degeneration
B. Diffuse Lewy body dementiaC. Drug-induced Parkinson’s diseaseD. Multiple systems atrophy with parkinsonian fea-
tures (Shy-Drager syndrome)
E. Parkinson’s disease with inadequate treatment
XI-30.    A 68-year-old man is brought to clinic for evalua-
tion by his wife. She has noticed that over past 2–3months he’s had increasingly slowed thinking and achange in his personality in that he’s become very with-drawn. His only complaint is a mild, but persistent, dif-fuse headache. There is no history of head trauma, priorneurologic or psychiatric disease, or family history of de-mentia. Physical examination is only notable for a mod-erate cognitive deﬁcit with a mini-mental examination of19/30. His head CT is shown in Figure XI-30. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Acute epidural hematoma
B. Acute subarachnoid hemorrhageC. Alzheimer’s diseaseD. Chronic subdural hematomaE. Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
XI-31.    Y ou are evaluating a patient who complains of ver-
tigo. The patient complains of seeing the room spin andfeeling faint with certain head movements to the left. Inyour ofﬁce, you perform provocative maneuvers to differ-entiate the cause of this patient’s vertigo. He has been di-agnosed with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo(BPPV), but symptoms have remained for many months.Which of the following ﬁndings would be suggestive of acentral positional vertigo?
A. Disappearance of the symptoms with maintenance
of the offending position
FIGURE XI-30
XI-29. (Continued) XI-26. (Continued)
426 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
B. Immediate vertigo and nystagmus with head turn-
ing to the affected side
C. Lessening of symptoms with repeated trials
D. Increased severity of symptoms with provocative testing
XI-32.    A 65-year-old man presents to your ofﬁce com-
plaining of a tremor and progressive gait abnormalities.He states that he ﬁrst noticed a slowing of his gait ~6months ago. He has difﬁculty rising to a standing posi-tion and states that he shufﬂes when he walks. In addi-tion, he states that his right hand shakes more so than hisleft, and he is right-handed. He believes it to be worsewhen not moving but states there are times when hespills his morning coffee because of the tremors. He hasretired but states he is not able to play tennis and golf anylonger because of his motor symptoms. He denies syn-cope or presyncope, difﬁculty swallowing, changes to hisvoice, or memory difﬁculties. His past medical history issigniﬁcant for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia.His medications are hydrochlorothiazide, 25 mg daily,ezetimibe, 10 mg daily, and lovastatin, 40 mg daily. Hedrinks a glass of wine with dinner daily and is a lifelongnonsmoker. On physical examination, he has masked fa-cies. His gait shows decreased arm swing with slow shuf-ﬂing steps. He turns en bloc. A pill-rolling tremor ispresent on the right side. There is cogwheel rigidity bilat-erally. Eye movements are full and intact. There is no or-thostatic hypotension. A brain MRI with gadoliniumshows no evidence of mass lesions, hydrocephalus, orvascular disease. Y ou diagnose the patient with Parkin-son’s disease. The patient asks about his prognosis andlikelihood of disability. Which of the following is correctabout the clinical course and treatment of Parkinson’sdisease?
A. Early initiation of therapy with levodopa predis-
poses an individual to a higher likelihood of dyski-
nesias early in the disease.
B. Early therapy with bilateral deep-brain stimulation
of the subthalamic nuclei slows progression of Par-kinson’s disease.
C. Initial treatment with a dopamine agonist such as
pramipexole is likely to be effective in controllinghis motor symptoms for 1–3 years before the addi-tion of levodopa or another agent is necessary.
D. Levodopa should be started immediately to prevent
development of disabling rigidity.
E. Monotherapy with selegiline, a monoamine oxydase
(MAO) inhibitor, causes a marked improvement intremors in most individuals with Parkinson’s disease.
XI-33.    A 74-year-old woman comes to clinic complaining
of muscle weakness. She has bilateral deltoid weakness,which has been present for 4 months. She has myalgias aswell throughout the day. Her symptoms are exacerbatedby activity and when she initially lays down to sleep. Neu-rologic examination shows intact cranial nerves IIthrough XII, except for poor vision due to cataracts. Shehas hyperesthesia in her arms in the area of her deltoids,but otherwise sensation is normal. Deep tendon reﬂexesare normal. Strength examination shows weakness ini-tially, but it improves with encouragement. Creatine ki-nase, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactiveprotein are within normal limits. An MRI of the deltoidmuscles shows joint degeneration and a partial rotatorcuff tear on the left. Y ou are considering a muscle biopsy.What is the biopsy most likely to show?
A. Endomysial deposits of amyloid
B. Necrotic muscleC. Normal muscleD. Scattered inﬂammatory foci surrounding muscle ﬁbers
XI-34.   Which of the following criteria suggests the diagno-
sis of trigeminal neuralgia?
A. Deep-seated steady facial pain
B. Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)C. Known metastatic brain tumorD. Objective signs of sensory loss on physical examinationE. Response to gabapentin therapyF. None of the above
XI-35.   CT scanning is superior to MRI of the back in which
setting?
A. Delineation of the extent of a syrinx 
B. Evaluation of old lumbar-spine fractureC. Evaluation of paraspinal massD. Imaging of the lateral recesses of the spinal canal
XI-36.   All the following cause primarily a sensory neuropa-
thy except
A. acromegaly
B. critical illnessC. HIV infectionD. hypothyroidismE. vitamin B
12 deﬁciency
XI-37.   A 45-year-old woman presents for evaluation of a
tingling sensation in her feet that has become more ap-parent over the past 5 months. She states that it currentlyis causing a painful sensation and is interfering with hersleep at night. On physical examination, you identify de-creased sensation to pinprick and light touch in her feetextending to her mid-calf area. All of the following labo-ratory tests may be useful in determining the cause of herperipheral neuropathy except
A. blood lead levelB. fasting blood glucoseC. hemoglobin A1CD. rapid plasma reagin for syphilisE. red blood cell folate levelsXI-33. (Continued) XI-31. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 427
XI-38.   A young man with a history of a low-grade astrocy-
toma comes into your ofﬁce complaining of weight gain
and low energy. He is status post resection of his low-gradeastrocytoma and had a course of whole-brain radiationtherapy (WBRT) 1 year ago. A laboratory workup reveals adecreased morning cortisol level of 1.9 µg/dL. In addition
to depressed adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) func-tion, which of the following hormones is most sensitive todamage from whole-brain radiation therapy?
A. Growth hormone
B. Follicle stimulating hormoneC. ProlactinD. Thyroid stimulating hormone
XI-39.   A 29-year-old man being treated for lung cancer
comes into your ofﬁce for an acute visit. He has had back-ache for a few weeks that has improved with ibuprofen buthas developed right lower abdominal pain and inguinalpain. On physical examination, he has tenderness over thelower thoracic spinous processes and hyperesthesia in theT11 distribution on the right. Strength is normal in the up-per extremities, but he has symmetric weakness in thelower extremities with hyperreﬂexia. He also has decreasedsensation below the T11 distribution symmetrically. Whatis the next step in the management of this patient?
A. Add gabapentin to his pain regimen.
B. Order a paraneoplastic antibody panel.C. Start treatment with glucocorticoids.D. Order thoracic and lumbar radiographs.
XI-40.   A 50-year-old man complains of weakness. His
symptoms began as difﬁculty with buttoning his shirt andusing keys to open doors about 2 years ago. He wastreated empirically with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatorymedications for arthritis, but responded only minimally.His symptoms have slowly progressed to the point wherehe has weakness in both hands and feet. He avoids goingoutside because of frequent falls. On examination, he hasweakness and atrophy of the foot extensor and ﬁnger ﬂex-ors. Proximal muscle strength is normal. Reﬂexes are nor-mal, and sensation is intact. He is able to rise out of achair, but the Romberg test is not able to be performeddue to weakness once standing. Cranial nerves are intact.Serum creatine kinase is 600 U/L. Complete blood count,differential, electrolytes, and thyroid-stimulating hor-mone (TSH) are normal. Based on the clinical presenta-tion, what is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Dermatomyositis
B. Eosinophilic myofasciitisC. Inclusion body myositisD. PolymyositisE. Hyperthyroidism
XI-41.   Y ou are conducting research on a cellular model of
myasthenia gravis in which you measure features of theacetylcholine (ACh) neuromuscular junction and its mi-croenvironment. In a patient with untreated myastheniagravis, which of the following do you expect to ﬁnd atthe neuromuscular junction after release of ACh fromthe presynaptic neuron?
A. Decreased levels of ACh-esterase
B. Decreased numbers of available ACh receptorsC. Decreased released of ACh from the presynaptic
neuron
D. High numbers of mitochondria in the postsynaptic
neuron
XI-42.    Y ou have just admitted a young man with a prior his-
tory of seizure disorder who was witnessed to have a sei-zure. His family’s description suggests a simple partialseizure involving the left hand that spread to involve theentire arm. He did not lose consciousness. He was broughtin 2 h after symptom onset and is currently awake, alert,and oriented. He has not had any further seizures but hasbeen unable to move his left hand since his seizure. Hiselectrolytes and complete blood count are within normallimits. A noncontrast CT scan of his head is unremarkable.On examination, sensation is intact in the affected limbbut his strength is 0 out of 5 in the musculature of the lefthand. What is the best course of action at this time?
A. Cerebral angiogram
B. Lumbar punctureC. Magnetic resonance angiogramD. Psychiatric evaluationE. Reassess in a few hours
XI-43.    A 78-year-old man with diabetes mellitus presents
with fever, headache and altered sensorium. On physicalexam his temperature is 40.2°C, heart rate is 103 beats/min,blood pressure is 84/52 mmHg. His neck is stiff and he hasphotophobia. His cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) examinationshows 2100 cells/ µL, with 100% neutrophils, glucose 10
mg/dL, and protein 78 mg/dL. CSF gram stain is negative.Empirical therapy should include which of the following?
A. Amphotericin
B. Dexamethasone after antibioticsC. Dexamethasone prior to antibioticsD. DoxycyclineE. Piperacillin/tazobactam
XI-44.    A 24-year-old woman seeks evaluation for headaches.
She ﬁrst began having recurrent headaches her senior yearof high school. The headaches increased in frequency dur-ing college, and she has always attributed her headaches totension. The headaches would be more prominent duringtimes of sleep loss, stress, and in the perimenstrual period.She states that she expected her headaches to improve nowthat she has ﬁnished college and has a more regular sched-ule. She works as a ﬁnancial counselor for a university inthe human resources department and denies a large degreeof stress in her job. She has had this job for 2 years, but theXI-41. (Continued)
428 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
headaches continue to disrupt her life. She states the head-
aches occur about seven times monthly. She estimates thatthe headaches occur >90% of the time on the right side andhave a throbbing nature. She has no aura before the onsetof a headache but describes occasional visual disturbanceand photophobia during the headache. She also states thatshe frequently develops sensitivity of her scalp on the sideof the headache with associated paresthesias. She rates thepain as about 7 to 8 out of 10 for a usual headache. On twooccasions over the past 6 months, she has developed severevertigo that resolved over the course of several hours in as-sociation with a mild headache. She has never had to misswork because of headache, but feels like her productivity islimited when she feels unwell. Other triggers for her head-aches include red wine and aged cheese, which she hasrestricted from her diet for this reason. Ibuprofen, aceta-minophen, and naprosyn sodium have no effect on the du-ration of her headaches. She is otherwise healthy and deniesassociated rhinorrhea or lacrimation. Her only medicationis oral contraceptive pills. Her family history is signiﬁcantfor a maternal aunt with classic migraine headaches withaura. The physical examination is normal without any evi-dence of neurologic deﬁcits and normal blood pressure.What is the most appropriate next step in evaluation andmanagement of this patient?
A. Ask the subject to keep a headache diary for the next
2 months to assess the frequency and severity of
headaches and assess for speciﬁc triggers.
B. Encourage the patient to keep a regular routine in-
cluding consistent sleep-wake cycle and regular ex-ercise such as yoga.
C. Initiate therapy with rizatriptan, 10 mg orally, at on-
set of attacks.
D. Perform an MRI of the brain.E. A, B, and CF. All of the above
XI-45.    Which of the following cranial nerve physical exam-
ination techniques represents the correct approach to thepatient with suspected neurologic disease?
A. Olfactory nerve: With eyes closed, ask the patient to
sniff a pungent stimulus such as ammonia or alcohol.
B. Optic nerve: Check visual acuity in both eyes using a
Snellen chart without having the patient use their
corrective lenses.
C. Trigeminal nerve: Examine the motor territories on
each side of the face by testing jaw clench, eyebrowelevation and forehead wrinkling.
D. Accessory nerve: Check shoulder shrug and head ro-
tation on each side against resistance.
XI-46.    Y ou are going on morning rounds to see a 38-year-old
woman who presented the prior day with weakness anddouble vision. It is reported that on examination at thattime she had pronounced weakness in cranial nerves VIIand XII. She also had weakness in the extraocular muscles,which is described to you as “googly eyes” with repeat ex-aminations. The patient reports that she has profounddouble vision almost exclusively when she watches televi-sion in the evening. On your examination, you ﬁnd noneurologic abnormalities. A head CT is unremarkable. Thepatient denies any other past medical history and has amini-mental status examination score of 30/30. What is thenext appropriate step in the management of this patient?
A. Formal psychiatric evaluation
B. MRI of the brainC. Serum anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodiesD. Serum lead levelE. Slit-lamp examination
XI-47.   A 37-year-old man is witnessed by his family to have
a generalized tonic-clonic seizure at a party. He does nothave a known seizure disorder. There is no history ofhead trauma, stroke, or tumor. The patient is unem-ployed, married, and takes no medication. Physical exam-ination shows no skin abnormalities and no stigmata ofchronic liver or renal disease. The patient is postictal. Hisneck is difﬁcult to maneuver due to stiffness. His whiteblood cell count is 19,000/ µL, hematocrit 36%, and plate-
lets 200,000/ µL. Glucose is 102 mg/dL, sodium 136 meq/
dL, calcium 9.5 mg/dL, magnesium 2.2 mg/dL, SGOT 18U/L, blood-urea nitrogen 7 mg/dL, and creatinine 0.8mg/dL. Urine toxicology screen is positive for cocainemetabolites. Which next step is most appropriate in thispatient’s management?
A. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
B. Intravenous loading with antiepileptic medicationC. Lumbar punctureD. Magnetic resonance imagingE. Substance abuse counseling
XI-48.   All of the following myopathies would be inherited
from the female parent except
A. Becker muscular dystrophyB. Duchenne muscular dystrophyC. Kearns-Sayre syndromeD. limb-girdle muscular dystrophyE. myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red ﬁbers (MERFF)
XI-49.   A patient is brought to the emergency room after a
head-on motor vehicle collision. The patient is unrespon-sive even to painful stimuli and is apneic; however, hedoes have a pulse. Which of the following clinical ﬁndingswould exclude a diagnosis of brain death?
A. Bilateral positive Babinski signs
B. Constricted pupils C. Invariant pulse rateD. Positive deep tendon reﬂexesE. Presence of diabetes insipidusXI-46. (Continued) XI-44. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 429
XI-50.   A 45-year-old male presents with a daily headache.
He describes two attacks per day over the last 3 weeks.
Each attack lasts about an hour and awakens the patientfrom sleep. The patient has noted associated tearing andreddening of the right eye as well as nasal stufﬁness. Thepain is deep, excruciating, and limited to the right side ofthe head. The neurologic examination is nonfocal. Themost likely diagnosis of this patient’s headache is
A. migraine headache
B. cluster headacheC. tension headacheD. brain tumorE. giant cell arteritis
XI-51.   A 72-year-old woman presents with recurrent episodes
of incapacitating facial pain lasting from second to minutesand then dissipating. The episodes occur usually twice perday, usually without warning, but are also occasionally pro-voked by brushing of her teeth. On physical examination,she appears well with normal vital signs. Detailed cranialnerve examination reveals no sensory or motor abnormali-ties. The remainder of her neurologic examination is nor-mal. What is the next step in her management?
A. Brain MRI
B. Brain MRI plus carbamazepine therapyC. Carbamazepine therapyD. Glucocorticoid therapyE. Referral to Otolaryngology for surgical cure
XI-52.   A 26-year-old man presents to the emergency room
complaining of weakness and difﬁculty breathing. He ﬁrstnoticed a feeling of weakness in his legs with difﬁculty climb-ing the stairs to his third-ﬂoor apartment 5 days ago. Overthe ensuing days, his weakness has progressed such that hefeels like he is tripping when he walks on ﬂat surfaces andwas unable to climb to his apartment yesterday. In addition,he now states that he is having difﬁculty lifting his armsabove his head to comb his hair and twice dropped a bottleof soda on the ﬂoor due to a feeling of weakness in his arms.He also states that he feels short of breath, especially if lyingﬂat. He complains of a tingling in his hands and feet. His pastmedical history is notable for sickle cell trait. Three weeksago, he was treated for dehydration in the emergency roomfor food poisoning with diarrhea, abdominal pain, and low-grade fevers. This resolved within 2 days, and he had beenfeeling in his usual state of health prior to the onset of thecurrent symptoms. He is on no medication and has no his-tory of illicit drug use. He has no recent travel and has noteaten shellﬁsh, honey, or home-canned foods. On physicalexamination, he appears breathless, has difﬁculty completingsentences, and is using accessory muscles of respiration. Hisvital signs show a respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min, a heartrate of 95 beats/min, a blood pressure of 112/76 mmHg, anda temperature of 37.6°C. His weight is 80 kg. His ocularmovements are full. There is no papillary dilatation. On pul-monary examination, his breath sounds are clear. There isparadoxical motion of the abdomen with inspiration. Neu-rologic examination shows 3/5 strength symmetrically in theupper and lower extremities with absent deep tendon re-ﬂexes. Cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and skin examina-tions are normal. Arterial blood gases show a pH of 7.55, aPa
CO2 of 28 mmHg, and a Pa O2 of 84 mmHg while breathing
room air. His vital capacity is 800 mL. What is the most ap-propriate treatment for this individual?
A. Botulinum antitoxin
B. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg)C. IVIg and mechanical ventilationD. IVIg, mechanical ventilation, and ciproﬂoxacinE. Plasmapheresis and glucocorticoids
XI-53.    The most common cause of a cerebral embolism is
A. cardiac prosthetic valvesB. rheumatic heart diseaseC. dilated cardiomyopathyD. endocarditisE. atrial ﬁbrillation
XI-54.    When evaluating a patient for low back pain, which
statement is true regarding the utility of the straight leg raisetest?
A. Passive dorsiﬂexion of the foot during the maneuver
will elicit pain from the contralateral nerve root.
B. The crossed straight leg raise is more speciﬁc for
disk herniation than the straight leg raise.
C. The reverse straight leg raise is indicative of back
pain referred from visceral organs.
D. The straight leg raise test is positive if there is re-
stricted range of motion of the affected limb.
XI-55.    A 37-year-old woman complains of headache and
blurry vision that have been present for a year and are
slowly getting worse. As part of her evaluation an MRI isobtained and shown below:
FIGURE XI-55
XI-52. (Continued)
430 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
What is the most likely diagnosis in this patient?
A. Brain abscess
B. GlioblastomaC. Low-grade astrocytomaD. MeningiomaE. Oligodendroglioma
XI-56.    All but which of the following statements regarding
epilepsy are true?
A. The incidence of suicide is higher in epileptic pa-
tients than it is in the general population.
B. Mortality is no different in patients with epilepsy
than it is in age-matched controls.
C. A majority of patients with epilepsy that is com-
pletely controlled with medication eventually will be
able to discontinue therapy and remain seizure free.
D. Surgery for mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) de-
creases the number of seizures in over 70% of patients.
E. Tricyclic antidepressants lower the seizure threshold
and may precipitate seizures.
XI-57.    A 54-year-old male is referred to your clinic for eval-
uation of atrial ﬁbrillation. He ﬁrst noted the irregularheartbeat 2 weeks ago and presented to his primary carephysician. He denies chest pain, shortness of breath, nau-sea, or gastrointestinal symptoms. Past medical history isunremarkable. There is no history of hypertension, dia-betes, or tobacco use. His medications include meto-prolol. The examination is notable for a blood pressure of126/74 mmHg and a pulse of 64 beats/min. The jugularvenous pressure is not elevated. His heart is irregularly ir-regular, with normal S
1 and S 2. The lungs are clear, and
there is no peripheral edema. An echocardiogram shows aleft atrial size of 3.6 cm. Left ventricular ejection fractionis 60%. There are no valvular or structural abnormalities.Which of the following statements regarding his atrial ﬁ-brillation and stroke risk is true?
A. He requires no antiplatelet therapy or anticoagula-
tion because the risk of embolism is low.
B. Lifetime warfarin therapy is indicated for atrial ﬁbril-
lation in this situation to reduce the risk of stroke.
C. He should be admitted to the hospital for intrave-
nous heparin and undergo electrical cardioversion;
afterward there is no need for anticoagulation.
D. His risk of an embolic stroke is less than 1%, and he
should take a daily aspirin.
E. He should be started on subcutaneous low-molecu-
lar-weight heparin and transitioned to warfarin.
XI-58.    A 34-year-old woman seeks evaluation for weak-
ness. She has noted tripping when walking, particularlyin her left foot, for the past 2 years. She recently also be-gan to drop things, once allowing a full cup of coffee tospill onto her legs. In this setting, she also feels as if theappearance of her face has changed over the course ofmany years, stating that she feels as if her face is becomingmore hollow and elongated although she hasn’t lost anyweight recently. She has not seen a physician in manyyears and has no past medical history. Her only medica-tions are a multivitamin and calcium with vitamin D. Herfamily history is signiﬁcant for similar symptoms ofweakness in her brother who is 2 years older. Her mother,who is 58 years old, was diagnosed with mild weaknessafter her brother was evaluated, but is not symptomatic.On physical examination, the patient’s face appears longand narrow with wasting of the temporalis and massetermuscles. Her speech is mildly dysarthric, and the palate ishigh and arched. Strength is 4/5 in the intrinsic musclesof the hand, wrist extensors, and ankle dorsiﬂexors. Aftertesting handgrip strength, you notice that there is a de-layed relaxation of the muscles of the hand. What is themost likely diagnosis?
A. Acid maltase deﬁciency (Pompe’s disease)
B. Becker muscular dystrophyC. Duchenne muscular dystrophyD. Myotonic dystrophyE. Nemaline myopathy
XI-59.   A 20-year-old woman is brought to the emergency
department after a witnessed generalized tonic-clonic sei-zure. She has no identifying information, and her pastmedical history is unknown. What is the most likely causeof her seizure?
A. Amyloid angiopathy
B. FeverC. Genetic disorderD. Illicit drug useE. Uremia
XI-60.   The presence of startle myoclonus in a 60-year-old
man with rapidly progressive deﬁcits in cortical dysfunc-tion is which one of the following?
A. Neither sensitive nor speciﬁc for Creutzfeldt-Jacob
disease (CJD) but does represent grounds to explore
further for this condition with an electroencephalo-gram (EEG)
B. Neither sensitive nor speciﬁc for CJD but does rep-
resent grounds to explore further for this conditionwith an EEG and brain MRI
C. Sensitive but not speciﬁc for CJD and is not enough
to prompt a further workup for this condition un-less other clinical criteria are met
D. Speciﬁc but not sensitive for CJD and should there-
fore prompt immediate referral for brain biopsy toconﬁrm the diagnosis
E. Virtually diagnostic for CJD, and further workup
including EEG, brain MRI, and perhaps brain bi-opsy serves only a prognostic purposeXI-58. (Continued) XI-55. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 431
XI-61.   Which nerve functions are spared in a patient with ven-
tral cord syndrome due to an anterior spinal cord infarct?
A. Bladder sphincter control
B. Motor strengthC. Pain sensationD. ProprioceptionE. T endon reﬂexes
XI-62.   A 33-year-old woman complains of a rash on her
chest. She has had a nonpruritic red rash on the upperchest for 4 weeks associated with a raised erythematousrash on her hands. She does not wear V-neck shirts, butthe chest rash is in a V-neck distribution. Her hands havea scaly reddish-purple eruption, and her ﬁnger pads havebecome thicker and rougher (see Figure XI-62, Color At-las). She also has a slight red hue on the upper eyelids. 
What other ﬁndings are likely to be present in this patient?
A. Delayed relaxation phase of deep tendon reﬂexes
B. HepatosplenomegalyC. Muscle weaknessD. Situs inversusE. Subcutaneous nodules on the back of the forearm
XI-63.   A 65-year-old male presents with severe right-sided
eye and facial pain, nausea, vomiting, colored halosaround lights, and loss of visual acuity. His right eye isquite red, and that pupil is dilated and ﬁxed. Which of thefollowing diagnostic tests would conﬁrm the diagnosis?
A. CT of the head
B. MRI of the headC. Cerebral angiographyD. T onometryE. Slit-lamp examination
XI-64.   A 21-year-old man presents to your clinic complain-
ing of progressive weakness in the feet for the last 2 years.He describes slowly progressive difﬁculty in lifting his feetoff the ground when walking. The legs have “gottensmaller” in bulk. Past medical history is unremarkable. Thefamily history is signiﬁcant for his father, brother, and pa-ternal grandmother all having similar “weaknesses.” Theexamination is notable for distal atrophy below the mid-calves and for prominent high arches. There is obviousfootdrop, and dorsiﬂexion of the foot is severely dimin-ished bilaterally. Y ou suspect a form of Charcot-Marie-T ooth disease and order nerve conduction studies. Whichof the following statements about CMT disease is true?
A. CMT disease is usually a motor neuropathy; sensory
features are rare and should prompt an alternative
diagnosis.
B. Immunotherapy with intravenous immune globulin
and/or plasmapheresis may slow the progression ofCMT disease.
C. CMT disease affects approximately 1 in 100,000 in-
dividuals.D. Transmission is most commonly autosomal domi-
nant but may be autosomal recessive or X-linked.
E. The age of this patient at presentation is atypical;
patients usually present in the fourth and ﬁfth de-cades of life.
XI-65.    A 45-year-old African-American man presents to
the emergency room complaining of facial weakness. Heﬁrst noticed a slight weakness of the left side of his facethe day previously, and upon awakening today, had nomovement on the left side of his face. Over the next sev-eral hours, the right side of his face also develops signiﬁ-cant weakness as well. He denies any recent fevers, chills,rashes, or night sweats. His weight is 90 kg and is stable.He lives in an urban area of North Carolina and does nothave any pets. He works as an accountant. He is marriedand is monogamous. He has hypertension treated with is-radipine, 5 mg twice daily. On physical examination, hehas complete paralysis of the left face with marked weak-ness of the right face. He is unable to lift his eyebrows onthe left but can minimally do so on the right. A chest ra-diograph on admission shows bilateral hilar adenopathyand increased interstitial markings that are most promi-nent in the lung apices. An MRI scan with gadoliniumshows bilateral enhancement of the seventh cranial nerveswith mild meningeal enhancement. A lumbar puncture isperformed with the following results: opening pressure12 cmH
2O, red blood cell count 0/ µL, white blood cell
count 21/ µL (differential 78% lymphocytes, 22% neutro-
phils), protein 80 mg/dL, and glucose 62 mg/dL. No or-ganisms are seen on smear. What is the most likelydiagnosis?
A. Lyme disease
B. Multiple sclerosisC. SarcoidosisD. TuberculosisE. Viral meningitis 
XI-66.    Which of the following groups of patients should re-
ceive empirical antibiotic therapy that includes coverageof Listeria monocytogenes  in cases of presumed meningitis?
A. Immunocompromised patientsB. Elderly patientsC. InfantsD. All of the above
XI-67.    Which of the following neurologic phenomena is
classically associated with herniation of the brain throughthe foramen magnum?
A. Third-nerve compression and ipsilateral papillary
dilation
B. Catatonia
C. “Locked-in” stateD. Miotic pupilsE. Respiratory arrestXI-64. (Continued)
432 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
XI-68.    A 72-year-old female presents with brief, intermit-
tent excruciating episodes of lancinating pain in the lips,
gums, and cheek. These intense spasms of pain may beinitiated by touching the lips or moving the tongue. Theresults of a physical examination are normal. MRI of thehead is also normal. The most likely cause of this patient’spain is
A. acoustic neuroma
B. meningiomaC. temporal lobe epilepsyD. trigeminal neuralgiaE. facial nerve palsy
XI-69.    A 38-year-old female patient with facial and ocular
weakness has just been diagnosed with myasthenia gravis.Y ou intend to initiate therapy with anticholinesterasemedications and glucocorticoids. All of the followingtests are necessary before instituting this therapy except
A. MRI of mediastinumB. puriﬁed protein derivative skin testC. lumbar punctureD. pulmonary function testsE. thyroid-stimulating hormone
XI-70.    A 76-year-old nursing home resident is brought to
the local emergency room after falling out of bed. The fallwas not witnessed; however, she was suspected to have hither head. She is not responsive to verbal or light tactilestimuli. At baseline she is able to converse but is fre-quently disoriented to place and time. She has a medicalhistory that includes stable coronary disease, mild em-physema, and multi-infarct dementia. Immediately aftertriage she is taken for a CT scan of the head. Which of thefollowing is true regarding head injury and hematomas?
A. More than 80% of patients with subdural hemato-
mas will experience a lucid interval prior to loss of
consciousness.
B. Epidural hematomas generally arise from venous
sources.
C. Epidural hematomas are common among the el-
derly with minor head trauma.
D. Most patients presenting with epidural hematomas
are unconscious.
E. Subdural hematomas lead to rapid increases in in-
tracranial pressure and can require arterial ligation.
XI-71.    A 45-year-old male complains of severe right arm
pain. He gives a history of having slipped on the ice andseverely contusing his right shoulder approximately 1month ago. At this time he has sharp knifelike pain in theright arm and forearm. Physical examination reveals aright arm that is more moist and hairy than the left arm.There is no speciﬁc weakness or sensory change. How-ever, the right arm is clearly more edematous than theleft, and the skin appears somewhat atrophic in the af-fected limb. The patient’s pain most likely is due toA. subclavian vein thrombosisB. brachial plexus injuryC. reﬂex sympathetic dystrophyD. acromioclavicular separationE. cervical radiculopathy
XI-72.    Which of the following statements regarding the long-
term outcomes in individuals with severe migraines is true?
A. Factors such as cigarette smoking and hypertension
have no modifying risk on the development of ischemic
stroke in individuals who have migraine with aura.
B. In both women and men, migraine with aura is as-
sociated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke.
C. Migraines generally persist unchanged in severity
throughout life.
D. Migraine with or without aura is associated with an
increased risk of subclinical posterior circulation in-farction on MRI.
E. Women on oral contraceptives who have migraines
without aura should discontinue these medicationsbecause of a marked increased risk of ischemic stroke.
XI-73.    A 40-year-old man has recurrent bouts of tinnitus.
Except for a fairly severe upper respiratory tract infection1 year ago, he has been healthy for all of his life. In the lastyear he has had two self-limited episodes of tinnitus asso-ciated with dizziness and a decrement in his hearing. Hissymptoms are always unilateral on the same side and haverequired him to take off from work for a few days eachtime. He comes into your ofﬁce at the outset of his thirdbout of tinnitus. He has taken meclizine at home with norelief. In your ofﬁce, he has tinnitus and vertigo whileseated, which is exacerbated with ambulation. His symp-toms of dizziness are not reproduced with Dix-Hallpikemaneuvers. Which is the best long-term treatment optionfor the patient at this time?
A. Diuretic
B. GlucocorticoidC. Epley procedureD. MetoclopramideE. Scopolamine transdermal
XI-74.    While you are working in the urgent care center, a
baby-sitter brings in a 7-year-old boy who complains of vi-sual changes. He complains of difﬁculty with blue-yellowcolor discrimination. He has no other past medical history.On examination, visual acuity in the right eye is 20/60 andin the left eye 20/80. He has blue-yellow color blindness.He has cerebellar ataxia on neurologic examination as wellas ophthalmoparesis. His strength is 5 out of 5 in all majormuscle groups, and all reﬂexes are normal except for exten-sor plantar responses. When the mother arrives, you ﬁndout that many relatives on the father’s side of the family, in-cluding the father, have been diagnosed with cerebellarataxia but she does not know more than that. Y ou decide toXI-71. (Continued)
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS 433
perform a funduscopic examination. What do you expect
to ﬁnd on examination of this patient’s fundi?
A. Lipemia retinalis
B. Normal examinationC. PapilledemaD. Proliferative retinopathyE. Retinal pigmentary degeneration
XI-75.    All the following have been shown to reduce the risk
of atherothrombotic stroke in primary or secondary pre-vention except
A. aspirinB. blood pressure controlC. clopidogrelD. statin therapyE. warfarin
XI-76.    All the following are associated with a decreased
sense of smell except
A. head trauma
B. HIV infectionC. inﬂuenza B infectionD. Kallmann syndromeE. parainﬂuenza virus type 3 infection
XI-77.    All the following are side effects of phenytoin except
A. ataxiaB. gum hyperplasiaC. hirsutismD. leukopeniaE. lymphadenopathy
XI-78.    All but which of the following statements about
Becker’s muscular dystrophy are true?
A. The inheritance is X-linked.
B. Serum creatinine kinase levels are elevated.C. The underlying genetic defect is in the myosin gene.D. Survival is better than it is in patients with Duchenne’s
muscular dystrophy (DMD).
E. Cardiomyopathy may occur, resulting in heart failure.
XI-79.    Y ou are following a patient who has a ruptured L4-
L5 intervertebral disk with herniation. He has had leftlower extremity weakness that has been constant for 6months. He is still able to perform his daily activities. Hispain is intermittent and he uses chronic narcotics on anas-needed basis. What ﬁndings would prompt you to re-fer this patient for surgery?
A. Absent deep tendon reﬂexes on the right
B. MRI shows L3-L4 herniation as wellC. Nighttime symptomsD. Physical examination demonstrates progressive weak-
ness
XI-80.    All of the following conditions may cause episodic
generalized paresis except
A. carotid artery stenosisB. hypokalemiaD. multiple sclerosisE. myasthenia gravisF. transient ischemic attack
XI-81.    Y ou are examining a 78-year-old patient in your clinic
who is referred to you for difﬁculty in walking. Duringyour motor examination with the patient lying supine, youplace your hands behind one knee and rapidly raise theknee off the bed. During the maneuver, the ankle (of thesame leg) is also lifted off the examining table. On repeatexamination of the same leg, you ﬁnd varying levels of re-sistance, and the ankle drags for varying distances beforebeing lifted off the bed. The ﬁnding is not seen in the otherleg nor in the upper extremities when examining the el-bow/wrist. What is the signiﬁcance of this ﬁnding?
A. The patient has decreased motor tone, which may
be indicative of a motor neuron disease.
B. The patient has decreased motor tone related to
musculoskeletal injury.
C. The patient’s paratonia may be a normal reaction.
D. The patient’s rigidity is a manifestation of parkin-
sonism.
XI-82.    Which of the following medicines has been most
commonly implicated in the development of noninfec-tious chronic meningitis?
A. Acetaminophen
B. AcyclovirC. β-lactam antibiotics
D. IbuprofenE. Phenobarbital
XI-83.   A 72-year-old right-handed male with a history of atrial
ﬁbrillation and chronic alcoholism is evaluated for dementia.His son gives a history of a stepwise decline in the patient’sfunction over the last 5 years with the accumulation of mildfocal neurologic deﬁcits. On examination he is found to havea pseudobulbar affect, mildly increased muscle tone, andbrisk deep tendon reﬂexes in the right upper extremity andan extensor plantar response on the left. The history and ex-amination are most consistent with which of the following?
A. Binswanger’s disease
B. Alzheimer’s diseaseC. Creutzfeldt-Jakob diseaseD. Vitamin B
12 deﬁciency
E. Multi-infarct dementiaXI-74. (Continued) XI-79. (Continued)
434 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — QUESTIONS
XI-84.    A 50-year-old male complains of weakness and
numbness in the hands for the last month. He describes
paresthesias in the thumb and the index and middle ﬁn-gers. The symptoms are worse at night. He also describesdecreased grip strength bilaterally. He works as a me-chanical engineer. The patient denies fevers, chills, orweight loss. The examination is notable for atrophy of thethenar eminences bilaterally and decreased sensation in amedian nerve distribution. All the following are causes ofcarpal tunnel syndrome except
A. amyloidosisB. chronic lymphocytic leukemiaC. diabetes mellitusD. hypothyroidismE. rheumatoid arthritisXI-84. (Continued)
435XI. NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
ANSWERS
XI-1. The answer is C.   (Chap. 26)   Confusion is deﬁned as a mental and behavioral state of
reduced comprehension, coherence, and capacity to reason. Delirium is used to describe
an acute confusional state. Delirium often goes unrecognized despite clear evidence thatit is often a cognitive manifestation of many medical and neurologic illnesses. Delirium isa clinical diagnosis that may be hyperactive (e.g., alcohol withdrawal) or hypoactive (e.g.,opiate intoxication). There is often dramatic ﬂuctuation between states. Delirium is asso-ciated with a substantial mortality with in-hospital mortality estimates ranging from 25–33%. Overall estimates of delirium in hospitalized patients range from 15–55% withhigher rates in the elderly. Patients in the ICU have especially high rates of delirium,ranging from 70–87%. The clinic setting would represent the lowest risk. Postoperativepatients, especially status post hip surgery, have an incidence of delirium that is some-what higher than patients admitted to the medical wards.
XI-2. The answer is D.   (Chap. 15)   This patient is presenting with typical cluster headaches,
one of the three recognized trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs). TACs are character-ized by intense episodes of head pain associated with cranial autonomic symptoms such astearing, rhinorrhea, and conjunctival injection. Because of these associated symptoms, pa-tients may be misdiagnosed as having sinus headache due to allergic rhinitis and treatedinappropriately with antihistamine and nasal steroids. A typical presentation of clusterheadaches is one of episodic severe headaches that occur at least once daily at about thesame time for a period of 8–10 weeks. An attack usually lasts from 15–180 minutes, and50% of headaches will have nocturnal onset. Between episodes of headache, the patient isgenerally well. The period between headache cycles typically lasts about 1 year. Men are af-fected three times more commonly with cluster headaches than women, and alcohol in-gestion may trigger cluster headaches. A distinguishing feature between cluster headachesand migraine headaches is that individuals with cluster headaches tend to move aboutduring attacks and frequently rub their head for relief, whereas those with migraines tendto remain motionless during attacks. Interestingly, unilateral phonophobia and photo-phobia can occur with cluster headaches but do not with migraines. Treatment of acute at-tacks of cluster headaches requires a treatment with a fast onset as the headaches reachpeak intensity very quickly but are of relatively short duration. High-ﬂow oxygen (10–12L/min for 15–20 min) has been very effective in relieving the headaches. Alternatively, sub-cutaneous or intranasal delivery of sumatriptan will also halt an attack. The oral-routetriptan medications are less effective because of the time to onset of effect is too great. Pre-ventive treatment may be considered in individuals with prolonged bouts of cluster head-aches or chronic cluster headaches that occur without a pain-free interval.
The other TAC syndromes are paroxysmal hemicrania and short-lasting unilateral
neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (commonlyknown as SUNCT). Paroxysmal hemicrania is characterized by unilateral severe head-aches lasting only 2–45 min but occurring up to ﬁve times daily. There is marked auto-nomic symptoms, and paroxysms of headaches last <3 days. Indomethacin is veryeffective at preventing this syndrome. SUNCT is a rare syndrome in which the headacheslast <4 min at a time. Diagnosis requires at least 20 attacks. There is no acute treatment ofSUNCT because of their short duration, but preventative therapy with lamotrigine, topi-ramate, gabapentin, or carbamazepine may be effective.
436 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-3. The answer is A.   (Chap. 383)   A common mistake in the management of patients with
inﬂammatory myopathy is to “chase the CK” instead of adjusting therapy based on the
clinical response. The goal of therapy is to improve strength. If that goal is beingachieved, no augmentation of therapy is necessary. In this case, the plan to switch tolong-term maintenance with steroid-sparing immunosuppressants should still be pur-sued. There have been no controlled studies comparing mycophenolate to methotrexatefor the long-term use in polymyositis, and in the absence of an adverse reaction to myco-phenolate, therapy should not be changed. Despite an elevated CK, patients with poly-myositis who are responding to therapy do not need a repeat muscle biopsy.
XI-4. The answer is C.   (Chap. 23)   The central cord syndrome manifests clinically as a sensory
disorder as the spinothalamic ﬁbers in the ventral commissure of the spinal cord are dis-rupted. Dermatomes above and below the level of the destruction are usually spared, cre-ating a “suspended sensory level” on physical examination. As the lesion grows,corticospinal tract or anterior horn involvement can produce weakness in the affectedmyotome. Common causes include syringomyelia, intramedullary tumor, and hyperex-tension in a patient with cervical spondylosis. Tabes dorsalis impairs proprioception andsensation and causes weakness. Disc herniation most commonly affects posterior cordfunction and nerve roots. A lateral hemisection syndrome (the Brown-Séquard syndrome)is classically due to penetrating trauma from a knife or bullet injury and produces ipsilat-eral weakness and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation. Amyotrophic lat-eral sclerosis presents with combined upper and lower motor neuron ﬁndings; sensorydeﬁcits are uncommon.
XI-5. The answer is D.   (Chap. 269)   This patient has evidence of increased intracranial pres-
sure and needs to be managed urgently. A variety of maneuvers may decrease intracranialpressure acutely. Hyperventilation causes vasoconstriction, reducing cerebral blood vol-ume and decreasing intracranial pressure. However, this can be used only for a short pe-riod as the decrease in cerebral blood ﬂow is of limited duration. Mannitol, an osmoticdiuretic, is recommended in cases of increased intracranial pressure resulting from cyto-toxic edema. Hypotonic ﬂuids should be avoided. Instead, hypertonic saline is given toelevate sodium levels and prevent worsening of edema. A more deﬁnitive treatment todecrease intracranial pressure is to have a ventriculostomy placed by which excessivepressure can be relieved by draining cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Further decreases in meanarterial pressure may worsen the patient’s clinical status. The patient already has hadmore than a 20% reduction in mean arterial pressure, which is the recommended reduc-tion in cases of hypertensive emergency. In addition, the patient is exhibiting signs of in-creased intracranial pressure, which indicates that cerebral perfusion pressure [meanarterial pressure (MAP) – intracranial pressure (ICP)] has been lowered. Paradoxically,the patient may need a vasopressor agent to increase MAP and thus improve cerebral per-fusion. Finally, in cases of increased intracranial pressure, nitroprusside is not a recom-mended intravenous antihypertensive agent because it causes arterial vasodilation andmay decrease cerebral perfusion pressure and worsen neurologic function.
XI-6. The answer C.   (Chap. 390)   Cigarette smoking is associated with early mortality from a
variety of causes including cardiovascular, respiratory, cerebrovascular, and oncologiccauses. It is also associated with increased complications during pregnancy (prematurerupture of membranes, placenta previa, abruption placenta), delay in healing of pepticulcers, osteoporosis, cataracts, macular degeneration, cholecystis in women, and impo-tence in men. Children born to smoking mothers are more likely to have preterm deliv-ery, higher perinatal mortality, higher rates of infant respiratory distress, and higher ratesof sudden infant death. Moreover, 400,000 individuals die prematurely each year in theUS from cigarette use, representing 1 out of every 5 deaths.
XI-7. The answer is B.   (Chap. 22)   The symptoms and signs described in this question are
most consistent with Ménière’s disease. In this disorder paroxysmal vertigo resultingfrom labyrinthine lesions is associated with nausea, vomiting, rotary nystagmus, tinnitus,high-tone hearing loss with recruitment, and, most characteristically, fullness in the ear.
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 437
Labyrinthitis would be an unlikely diagnosis in this case because of the hearing loss and
multiple episodes. Vertebral-basilar insufﬁciency and multiple sclerosis typically are asso-ciated with brainstem signs. Acoustic neuroma only rarely causes vertigo as the initialsymptom, and the vertigo it does cause is mild and intermittent.
XI-8. The answer is D.   (Chap. 376)   In a patient with suspected bacterial meningitis empirical
therapy should be administered promptly to reduce mortality and morbidity. The decisionto obtain an imaging study prior to lumbar puncture is based on the concern of precipitat-ing herniation in a patient with elevated intracranial pressure or focal CNS lesions. There-fore, patients with the presence of papilledema on physical examination, history of recenthead trauma, known or suspected intracranial lesions (immunosuppressed, known malig-nancy), focal neurologic ﬁndings, or depressed level of consciousness should have a headCT or MRI prior to lumbar puncture. Kernig’s sign is elicited in a supine patient by ﬂexingthe thigh and knee. A positive sign occurs when the patient has head/neck pain when pas-sively straightening the knee. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of this sign (also Brudzinski’s)for bacterial meningitis are unknown, but they imply meningeal irritation, not an intracra-nial lesion or elevated intracranial pressure. While cerebrospinal ﬂuid cultures may be im-pacted by administration of antibiotics prior to lumbar puncture, stains, antigen tests, andpolymerase chain reaction tests will not be affected.
XI-9. The answer is C.   (Chap. 25)   The patient’s nonspeciﬁc dysesthesia is related to hyper-
ventilation in response to the patient’s change in altitude from sea level to a mountain-ous area. The normal respiratory response to decreased atmospheric oxygen tension is toincrease the respiratory rate. This hyperventilation causes a mild respiratory alkalosisand is experienced as acral and periorbital dysesthesias. Acetazolamide is often given topatients who have a past history of altitude sickness manifested as headache, nausea withvomiting, and in severe cases pulmonary edema. This patient is experiencing none ofthose symptoms, and in fact, dysesthesias are a common side effect related to treatmentwith acetazolamide. No further blood testing is necessary as the symptoms are not asso-ciated with any neurologic abnormalities. Diabetes mellitus, vitamin B
12 deﬁciency, and
tertiary syphilis are all associated with a sensory neuropathy, which this patient does notdemonstrate.
XI-10. The answer is C.   (Chap. 361)   This patient demonstrates increasing weakness with re-
peated exertion, which is characteristic of neuromuscular junction diseases such as myas-thenia gravis. The course can ﬂuctuate over the course of a day, which may explain whyhis symptoms appear worse at the end of the day. The absence of any sensory deﬁcit isalso characteristic of a neuromuscular junction disorder. Diseases of the muscle usuallydo not exhibit such a marked difference on the examination over the course of hours.Spinal root disorders are symptomatic in a nerve root distribution, and limb pain is usu-ally a prominent component. Clues to a brainstem disease are isolated cranial nerve pal-sies and “crossed” weakness and sensory abnormalities of the head and limbs.
XI-11. The answer is B.   (Chap. 372)   This patient has a history and examination consistent
with a myelopathy. The rapidity of onset and the lack of other antecedent symptoms(e.g., pain) make a noncompressive etiology most likely. An MRI is the initial test ofchoice and will easily identify a structural lesion such as a neoplasm or subluxation. Non-compressive myelopathies result from ﬁve basic causes: spinal cord infarction; systemicdisorders such as vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and sarcoidosis; infec-tions (particularly viral); demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis; and idiopathic.Therefore, serologies for antinuclear antibodies, viral serologies such as HIV and HTLV-I, and lumbar puncture are all indicated. Because the clinical scenario is consistent with amyelopathy, an electromyogram is not indicated.
XI-12. The answer is D.   (Chap. 368)   This MRI shows cerebellar atrophy consistent with the
diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA). The SCAs are a group of autosomal dominantdiseases. SCA1, previously known as olivopontocerebellar atrophy, is a disease of early ormiddle adult life. Patients develop cerebellar ataxia of the trunk and limbs with impair-
438 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
ment of equilibrium and gait, scanning speech, nystagmus, and oscillatory tremor of the
head and trunk. There may also be mild dementia. Cerebellar and brainstem atrophy areevident on MRI. Migraine headache, limb weakness, and breathing difﬁculties are non-speciﬁc but may be seen in serotonin syndrome or alcohol withdrawal. Gait instability,urinary incontinence, and dementia constitute the clinical triad for normal-pressure hy-drocephalus, which does not have cerebellar atrophy on MRI. Hypertension, tachycardia,and diaphoresis may be seen in a patient with an Arnold-Chiari malformation. MRI willoften show abnormalities in the base of the skull.
XI-13. The answer is A.   (Chap. 373)   Concussions result from blunt head trauma that causes
anterior-posterior movement of the brain within the skull. Transient loss of consciousnessis common, as are confusion and amnesia. Head imaging is typically normal. Postconcus-sive syndrome is a constellation of symptoms including fatigue, headache, dizziness, anddifﬁculty concentrating that follows a concussion. The patient described above ﬁts this di-agnosis; strict diagnostic criteria do not exist. Typically patients will improve over a 6- to12-month period. Patients who were energetic and highly functioning prior to theirtrauma have an excellent prognosis. Treatment is aimed at reassurance and relievingprominent symptoms. Dizziness can be treated with phenergan, which acts as a vestibularsuppressant. He should avoid contact sports at least until his symptoms resolve.
XI-14. The answer is E.   (Chap. 378)   Prions are infectious particles that cause central nervous
system degeneration. The human prion diseases described to date include Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, kuru, Gerstmann-Straüssler-Scheinker disease, and fatal insomnia. Themost common prion disease is sporadic CJD (sCJD) which occurs in a seemingly randompattern in adults in their ﬁfth and sixth decades of life. sCJD accounts for about 85% ofcases of CJD and occurs in ~1 per 1 million population. Variant CJD (vCJD) results frominfection from bovine exposure to tainted beef from cattle with bovine spongiform en-cephalopathy (BSE). Infectious CJD (iCJD) has resulted from injection of tainted humangrowth hormone, as well as transplant of infected dura mater grafts into humans. Famil-ial CJD (fCJD) is due to germ-line mutations that follow an autosomal dominant inheri-tance. Kuru is due to infection through ritualistic cannibalism. Gerstmann-Straüssler-Scheinker disease and familial fatal insomnia (FFI) occur as dominantly inherited priondiseases. Sporadic cases of fatal insomnia (sFI) have been described.
XI-15. The answer is B.   (Chap. 16)   Neurogenic claudication (back or leg pain induced by
walking or standing and relieved by sitting) is the most common symptom of lumbar spi-nal stenosis. Unlike vascular claudication, symptoms are provoked by standing withoutwalking. Symptoms are often not present, and severe ﬁndings such as paralysis andurinary incontinence are rare. Lumbar spinal stenosis can be congenital or acquired.Acquired factors that contribute to spinal stenosis include trauma, osteoporosis, hypo-parathyroidism, renal osteodystrophy, and Paget’s disease. T ethered cord syndrome usu-ally presents as a cauda equina disorder (urinary incontinence, perineal anesthesia) in ayoung adult. Pain associated with disk herniation is differentiated from spinal stenosiswhen the pain is made worse with sitting. Vertebral metastases are a common cause ofback pain in patients at risk of common malignancies. The pain tends to be constant,dull, unrelieved by rest, and worst at night.
XI-16. The answer is A.   (Chap. 363)   Complex partial seizures are characterized by focal sei-
zure activity plus impairment of the patient’s ability to maintain contact with the envi-ronment. Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy is the most common syndrome associated withcomplex partial seizures. Patients are unable to respond to verbal or visual commandsduring the seizure and they often manifest complex automatisms or complex posturing.An aura is common before the seizures. There is postictal memory loss or disorientation.Patients often have a history of febrile seizures or a family history of seizures. MRI willshow hippocampal sclerosis, a small temporal lobe, or enlarged temporal horn. Hypothy-roidism, herpes virus infection, diabetes, and tuberous sclerosis are not associated withmesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 439
XI-17. The answer is B.   (Chap. 363)   MTLE is important to recognize because it tends to be re-
fractory to treatment with anticonvulsants but responds extremely well to surgical inter-
vention. Primidone is an alternative for treatment of partial and generalized tonic-clonicseizures. Levetiracetam is an alternative for simple partial, complex partial, and second-arily generalized seizures. Vagus nerve stimulation is an option for patients refractory toantiepileptic medication with seizures arising from more than one site. Herpes virus in-fection is not a cause of MTLE.
XI-18. The answer is C.   (Chap. 23)   A deep tendon reﬂex is elicited when a tap on a tendon
stretches muscle spindles which are chronically activated by γ motor neurons. Spindle af-
ferent neurons directly stimulate α motor neurons in the spinal cord, causing a muscle
contraction. The reﬂex arc operates independent of upper motor neurons (pyramidalneurons); however, loss of the inhibitory input from upper motor neurons produces anexaggerated deep tendon reﬂex.
XI-19. The answer is D.   (Chap. 375)   Optic neuritis is the initial symptom in approximately
40% of persons who are eventually diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. This rapidly develop-ing ophthalmologic disorder is associated with partial or total loss of vision, pain on mo-tion of the involved eye, scotoma affecting macular vision, and a variety of other visual ﬁelddefects. Ophthalmoscopically visible optic papillitis occurs in about half these patients.
XI-20. The answer is A.   (Chap. 16)   The most commonly affected nerve roots in cervical disk
disease are C7 and C6. As such, common motor ﬁndings include biceps and triceps weak-ness. Common sensory ﬁndings include abnormal sensation in the thumb and ﬁngers(except the little ﬁnger), radial hand, and dorsal forearm. Decreased pin-prick sensationover the lateral deltoid would be mediated by injury to the C5 nerve root. Finger ﬂexorsand sensation to the axilla and medial arm are mediated by C8 and T1.
XI-21. The answer is C.   (Chap. 368)   The patient describes cerebellar ataxia, which is differen-
tiated from ataxia associated with vestibular or labyrinthine disease by the absence of ver-tiginous complaints. True cerebellar ataxia is devoid of vertiginous symptoms and isclearly an unsteady gait due to imbalance. CT scanning can miss pathology in the cere-bellum due to the surrounding bony structures. Alcohol intoxication, lithium toxicity,and viral cerebritis usually cause acute or subacute (days to weeks) cerebellar ataxia. T er-tiary syphilis is a common cause of chronic cerebellar ataxia (months to years).TABLE XI-20 Cervical Radiculopathy—Neurologic Features
Cervical
NerveRootsExamination Findings
Pain Distribution Reflex Sensory Motor
C5 Biceps Over lateral 
deltoidSupraspinatusa (initial arm abduction)
Infraspinatusa (arm external rotation)
Deltoida (arm abduction)
Biceps (arm ﬂexion)Lateral arm, me-
dial scapula
C6 Biceps Thumb, index 
ﬁngers
Radial hand/
forearmBiceps (arm flexion)Pronator teres (internal forearm rotation)Lateral forearm, 
thumb, index ﬁnger
C7 Triceps Middle ﬁngers
Dorsum
forearmTriceps
a (arm extension)
Wrist extensorsaPosterior arm, 
dorsal forearm, lateral hand 
C8 Finger 
ﬂexorsLittle ﬁngerMedial hand 
and forearmAbductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1)First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2)Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)4th and 5th ﬁngers, 
medial forearm
T1 Finger 
flexorsAxilla and 
medial armAbductor pollicis brevis (abduction D1)First dorsal interosseous (abduction D2)Abductor digiti minimi (abduction D5)Medial arm, axilla
aThese muscles receive the majority of innervation from this root.
440 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-22. The answer is E.   (Chap. 25)   Thalamic pain syndrome may follow an embolic or lacu-
nar thalamic infarct if it affects the ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus or the adjacent
white matter. The pain is persistent and severe, affecting only the contralateral side of thebody. Other symptoms that may be associated with thalamic infarcts include hemianes-thesia, hemiataxia, choreoathetoid movements, and athetoid posture. The eponym ap-plied to this syndrome is Dejerine-Roussy syndrome.
XI-23. The answer is B.   (Chap. 390)   Smokers regulate their blood levels of nicotine by adjust-
ing the frequency and intensity of their tobacco use. Smokers can compensate for thelower levels of nicotine in low-yield cigarettes by smoking more cigarettes or by adjustingtheir smoking technique. Therefore, smoking low-yield cigarettes is not a reasonable al-ternative to smoking cessation. Moreover, there is no difference in the harmful physicaleffects of smoking or in the potential for drug interactions.
XI-24. The answer is A.   (Chap. 22)   In the acute evaluation of vertigo, vestibular function tests
can help to establish the side of the abnormality and differentiate between central and pe-ripheral etiologies. When performing electronystagmography using cold and warm watersequentially, the velocity of the slow-phase of nystagmus is compared from side to side.When warm water at 44°C is infused into an ear, the normal response is nystagmus withthe fast component toward the infused ear. The opposite response occurs when cold waterat 30°C is infused; the normal response is nystagmus with the fast component away fromthe cold water–infused ear. The volume of water can be increased if no response occurswith the initial attempt. Velocity of the slow phase should be similar in patients withoutvestibular nerve abnormalities. An absence of response to the cold caloric indicates a laby-rinth system that is “dead” and nonfunctional, such as in complete destruction of the neu-ral input with acoustic neuroma. Otoconia are not a result of and do not cause peripheralnerve dysfunction. The caloric testing is normal in patients with otoconia. The peripheralnerve dysfunction seen with aminoglycoside antibiotics is usually bilateral. Unilateralsymptoms should raise the suspicion for an anatomic as opposed to a systemic cause of thevertigo. Labyrinthine ischemia will also manifest as a “dead” labyrinth; however, the pa-tient’s age makes ischemic brainstem lesions less likely than a schwannoma.
XI-25. The answer is D.   (Chap. 374)   This scenario represents a common dilemma in the care of
patients with HIV infection. The differential diagnosis usually falls between CNS toxoplas-mosis or CNS lymphoma. The standard approach in a neurologically stable patient is to treatthe patient for toxoplasmosis for 2–3 weeks then repeat neuroimaging. If the imaging showsclear improvement, continue antibiotics. If not, then a stereotactic brain biopsy is indicated.Whole-brain radiation therapy is part of the treatment for CNS lymphoma, which is not yetdiagnosed in this patient, and should not be instituted empirically. In the absence of neuro-logic collapse, it is reasonable to treat empirically for toxoplasmosis in such a patient. Theleptomeninges are a common site for metastases for patients with systemic lymphoma andthose patients usually have a B cell lymphoma or leukemia. Dexamethasone is indicated for
focal CNS lesions with evidence of mass effect or extensive surrounding edema.
XI-26. The answer is D.   (Chap. 374)   In this immunocompromised patient who has not re-
sponded to treatment for CNS toxoplasmosis, a positive CNS EBV DNA would be diagnosticof CNS lymphoma. However, in the absence of a deﬁnitive diagnosis, a biopsy should be pur-sued for a deﬁnitive diagnosis. If there is no response to therapy after 2 weeks, therapy does notneed to be continued. Treatments directed at viral infections of the CNS or CNS lymphomasare not indicated at this time since a diagnosis is still yet to be made. In the absence of a changein neurologic status or evidence of mass effect on CT, there is no indication for dexamethasone.
XI-27. The answer is A.   (Chap. 372)   Syringomyelia is a developmental, slowly enlarging cavi-
tary expansion of the cervical cord that produces a progressive myelopathy. Symptoms typ-ically begin in adolescence or early adulthood. They may undergo spontaneous arrest afterseveral years. More than half are associated with Chiari malformations. Acquired cavita-tions of the spinal cord are referred to as syrinx cavities. They may result from trauma, my-elitis, infection, or tumor. The classic presentation is that of a central cord syndrome with
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 441
sensory loss of pain and temperature sensation and weakness of the upper extremities. Vi-
bration and position sensation are typically preserved. Muscle wasting in the lower neck,shoulders, arms, and hands with asymmetric or absent reﬂexes reﬂects extension of the cav-ity to the anterior horns. With progression, spasticity and weakness of the lower extremitiesand bladder and bowel dysfunction may occur. MRI scans are the diagnostic modality ofchoice. Surgical therapy is generally unsatisfactory. Syringomyelia associated with Chiarimalformations may require extensive decompressions of the posterior fossa. Direct decom-pression of the cavity is of debatable beneﬁt. Syringomyelia secondary to trauma or infec-tion is treated with decompression and a drainage procedure, with a shunt often insertedthat drains into the subarachnoid space. Although relief may occur, recurrence is common.
XI-28. The answer is E.   (Chap. 381)   Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular disorder
characterized by weakness and fatigability of skeletal muscles. The primary defect is a de-crease in the number of acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction secondaryto autoimmune antibodies. MG is not rare, affecting at least 1 in 7500 individuals. Womenare affected more frequently than are men. Women present typically in the second andthird decades of life, and men present in the ﬁfth and sixth decades. The key features ofMG are weakness and fatigability. Clinical features include weakness of the cranial mus-cles, particularly the lids and extraocular muscles. Diplopia and ptosis are common initialcomplaints. Weakness in chewing is noticeable after prolonged effort. Speech may be af-fected secondary to weakness of the palate or tongue weakness. Swallowing may resultfrom weakness of the palate, tongue, or pharynx. In the majority of patients the weaknessbecomes generalized. The diagnosis is suspected after the appearance of the characteristicsymptoms and signs. Edrophonium is an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor that allows ACh tointeract repeatedly with the limited number of AChRs, producing improvement in thestrength of myasthenic muscles. False-positive tests may occur in patients with other neu-rologic diseases. Electrodiagnostic testing may show evidence of reduction in the ampli-tude of the evoked muscle action potentials with repeated stimulation. T esting for thespeciﬁc antibodies to AChR are diagnostic. In addition to anti-AChR antibodies, antibod-ies to MuSK have been found in some patients with clinical MG. Antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels are found in patients with the Lambert-Eaton syndrome.
XI-29. The answer is D.   (Chap. 366)   The differential diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease is broad,
and the disease can be difﬁcult to diagnose, with an estimated misdiagnosis of 10–25% evenby experienced physicians. This patient exhibits several atypical features that should alertthe physician to search for alternative diagnoses. These include early age of onset, promi-nent orthostasis, autonomic symptoms of ﬂushing and diaphoresis, and failure to respondto dopaminergic agents. In addition, recurrent urinary tract infections should prompt anevaluation for urinary retention due to autonomic dysfunction in this patient. These symp-toms are most consistent with multiple systems atrophy with parkinsonian features (MSA-p).The average age of onset is 50 years, and these individuals more frequently present with bi-lateral, symmetric tremor and more prominent spasticity than those with Parkinson’s dis-ease. Orthostasis and autonomic symptoms are typically prominent. On MRI, one wouldexpect to ﬁnd volume loss and T2-hyperintensity in the area of the putamen, globus palli-dus, and white matter. On pathologic examination, α-synuclein-positive inclusions would
be seen in the affected areas. Median survival after diagnosis is 6–9 years. Dopaminergicagents are not helpful in treatment of this disorder and are usually associated with drug-induced dyskinesias of the face and neck, rather than the limbs and trunk. Corticobasal de-generation is a sporadic tauopathy that presents in the sixth to seventh decades. In contrastto Parkinson’s disease, this disorder is frequently associated with myoclonic jerks and invol-untary purposeful movements of a limb. Its progressive nature leads to spastic paraplegia.Diffuse Lewy body disease has prominent dementia with parkinsonian features. Neuropsy-chiatric complaints including paranoia, delusions, and personality changes are more com-mon than in Parkinson’s disease. Drug-induced Parkinson’s disease is not seen withnitrofurantoin, and the patient has no history of illicit drugs such as MTPT, which couldcause Parkinson’s disease. Finally, this is unlikely to be inadequately treated Parkinson’s dis-ease because one would expect at least an initial improvement on dopaminergic agents.
442 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-30. The answer is D.   (Chap. 373)   The head CT shows bilateral hypodense ﬂuid collections
in the subdural space. Acute hematomas (which would be as bright as the resolving blood
shown in arrows) become hypodense in comparison with adjacent brain after ~2months. During the isodense phase (2–6 weeks after injury), they may be difﬁcult to dis-cern. Chronic subdural hematoma may present without a history of trauma or injury in20–30% of patients. Headache is common. Other symptoms may be vague as in this case,or there may be focal signs including hemiparesis mimicking stroke. Underlying corticaldamage may serve as a seizure focus. In relatively asymptomatic patients with small he-matomas, observation and serial imaging may be reasonable; however, surgical evacua-tion is often necessary for large or symptomatic chronic hematomas.
XI-31. The answer is B.   (Chap 22) Positional vertigo is precipitated by a recumbent head posi-
tion, either to the right or the left. The benign form that affects the posterior semicircularcanal is the most common and is due to the accumulation of otoconia. Central positionalvertigo (CPV) is due to lesions of the fourth ventricle and is much less common thanBPPV . BPPV can be diagnosed and potentially treated with characteristic maneuvers (i.e.,Dix-Hallpike position). With the head supine, the head is turned to the affected side (leftear down, in this case). T orsional nystagmus and vertigo will result with characteristic eyemovements. In BPPV , the time from assuming head position and onset of symptoms is3–40 s, whereas in CPV , the onset is immediate. With BPPV , symptoms will abate whilethe head position is maintained, and repeat trials lessen the symptoms each time and mayextinguish them completely. With central causes of vertigo, symptoms are often less severethan with peripheral vertigo. Isolated horizontal nystagmus without a torsional compo-nent is also more suggestive of a central cause of vertigo.
XI-32. The answer is C.   (Chap. 366)   Therapy for Parkinson’s disease should be initiated when
symptoms interfere with the patient’s quality of life. Choice of initial drug therapy is usu-ally with dopamine agonists, levodopa, or MAO inhibitors. The initial choice in most in-dividuals is a dopamine agonist (pramipexole, ropinirole), and monotherapy withdopamine agonists usually controls motor symptoms for several years before levodopatherapy becomes necessary. Over this period, escalating doses are frequently required,and side effects may be limiting. It is thought that dopamine agonists delay the onset ofdyskinesias and on-off motor symptoms, such as freezing. By 5 years, over half of individ-uals will require levodopa to control motor symptoms. Levodopa remains the most effec-tive therapy for the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, but once levodopa is started,dyskinesias and on-off motor ﬂuctuations become more common. MAO inhibitors workby decreasing postsynaptic breakdown of dopamine. As monotherapy, these agents haveonly small effects and are most often used as adjuncts to levodopa. Surgical proceduressuch as pallidotomy and deep-brain stimulation are reserved for advanced Parkinson’sdisease with intractable tremor or drug-induced motor ﬂuctuations or dyskinesias. Inthis setting, deep-brain stimulation can alleviate disabling symptoms.
XI-33. The answer is C.   (Chap. 383)   This patient does not have signs of an inﬂammatory myosi-
tis. In particular, the “give-away” weakness and improvement with encouragement suggeststhat this patient’s “weakness” may actually be due to muscular pain. Fibrositis, polymyalgiarheumatica or ﬁbromyalgia may present this way, although the normal erythrocyte sedimen-tation rate makes polymyalgia rheumatica less likely. Necrotic muscle can be seen in any ofthe inﬂammatory myopathies or necrotizing myositis. Endomysial deposits of amyloid canbe seen in inclusion body myositis. Scattered inﬂammatory foci are seen in polymyositis.
XI-34. The answer is F .   (Chap. 371)   Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical diagnosis based entirely on
patient history. The disorder is characterized by paroxysms  of excruciating pain in the lips,
gums, cheeks, and chin that resolves over seconds to minutes. It is caused by ectopic actionpotentials in afferent pain ﬁbers of the ﬁfth cranial nerve, due either to nerve compression orother cause of demyelination. Symptoms are often, but not always, elicited by tactile stimulion the face, tongue or lips. An elevated ESR is not part of the clinical syndrome. Elevated ESRis associated with temporal arteritis, a vasculitis associated with jaw claudication, unilateralvision loss, and symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica. Trigeminal neuralgia is speciﬁcally
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 443
notable for a lack of sensory ﬁndings on examination, unless the diagnosis comes in conjunc-
tion with another disorder such as midbrain mass lesion or aneurysm. First-line therapy iswith carbamazepine followed by phenytoin, rather than gabapentin. Deep-seated facial andhead pain is more a feature of migraine headache, dental pathology, or sinus disease.
XI-35. The answer is B.   (Chap. 16)   MRI is the radiologic test of choice for evaluation of most
serious processes involving the spine. However, CT scanning is the preferred test whenimaging of the bony structures is most important. In acute processes such as fracture ordislocation, MRI may reveal the edema associated with the acute inﬂammation, but formore chronic bony conditions, CT scanning is the test of choice. MRI is better than CTscanning for imaging the soft tissues surrounding the spine. Imaging the spinal cord it-self, in the case of syringomyelia, is also better accomplished with MRI. Similarly, MRI isbetter than CT scanning for imaging the lateral recesses of the spinal cord; however, CT-myelography is preferred over MRI for that indication.
XI-36. The answer is B.   (Chap. 379)   Peripheral neuropathy is a general term indicating periph-
eral nerve disorders of any cause. The causes are legion, but peripheral neuropathy can beclassiﬁed by a number of means: axonal versus demyelinating, mononeuropathy versuspolyneuropathy versus mononeuritis multiplex, sensory versus motor, and the tempo ofthe onset of symptoms. Mononeuropathy typically results from local compression, trauma,or entrapment of a nerve. Polyneuropathy often results from a more systemic process. Thedistinction between axonal and demyelinating can often be made only with nerve conduc-tion studies. HIV infection causes a common, distal, symmetric, mainly sensory polyneu-ropathy. Vitamin B
12 deﬁciency typically causes a sensory neuropathy that predominantly
involves the dorsal columns. Hypothyroidism and acromegaly may both cause compres-sion and swelling of nerve ﬁbers, resulting ﬁrst in sensory symptoms and later in diseasewith motor symptoms. Critical illness polyneuropathy is predominantly motor in presen-tation. These patients may recover over the course of weeks to months. The etiology is un-known, but an association may exist with neuromuscular blockade and corticosteroids.
XI-37. The answer is E.   (Chap. 379)   Peripheral neuropathy is a common disorder affecting 2–
8% of the adult population and increasing with age. The causes of peripheral neuropathyare myriad and can be classiﬁed by location, ﬁber type, histopathology, and time course.Speciﬁc features of the history and physical examination should lead the clinician to-wards a possible diagnosis. For example, lead toxicity is frequently associated with motorabnormalities in addition to sensory neuropathy. Laboratory examination with speciﬁctesting may be useful in assessing for a variety of etiologies of peripheral neuropathy, in-cluding diabetes mellitus, heavy metal toxicity, metabolic abnormalities, vasculitis, andinfections (syphilis, Lyme disease, HIV). Of the choices listed in the question, folate deﬁ-ciency is not associated with peripheral neuropathy.
XI-38. The answer is A.   (Chap. 374)   Endocrine dysfunction resulting in hypopituitarism fre-
quently follows exposure of the hypothalamus or pituitary gland to therapeutic radia-tion. Growth hormone is the most sensitive to the damaging effects of WBRT, andthyroid-stimulating hormone is the least sensitive. ACTH, prolactin, and gonadotropinshave an intermediate sensitivity. Other complications of radiation therapy to the braininclude acute radiation injury manifest by headache, sleepiness, and worsening of preex-isting neurologic defects. Early delayed radiation injury occurs within the ﬁrst 4 monthsafter therapy. It is associated with increased white matter signal on MRI and is steroid-responsive. Late delayed radiation injury occurs >4 months after therapy, typically 8–24months. There may be dementia, gait apraxia, focal necrosis (after focal irradiation), ordevelopment of secondary malignancies.
XI-39. The answer is C.   (Chap. 374)   Spinal cord compression from solid tumor metastases usu-
ally results from growth of a bony vertebral metastasis into the epidural space. The mostcommon primary tumors that metastasize to the bone include lung, breast, and prostate.The thoracic cord is most often involved. Back pain is a prominent symptom in 90% of pa-tients with vertebral metastases and spinal cord compression. Concerning features of this pa-
444 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
tient’s presentation include the symptoms of radicular injury as well as the signs of radicular
and spinal cord impingement on physical examination. Once signs of spinal cord compres-sion develop, they usually progress rapidly and warrant rapid therapy. Appropriate therapyincludes emergent scanning with an MRI as well as immediate glucocorticoids if there aresigns of spinal cord impingement. Subsequent management will depend on the extent of in-volvement and the primary tumor. Conservative pain management measures are not appro-priate in this patient since he has very concerning neurologic ﬁndings for spinal cordcompression and delay will increase the likelihood of irreversible defects. Antibody-mediatedparaneoplastic neurologic syndromes are unlikely to cause focal ﬁndings such as in this pa-tient. Radiographs may show bony metastases but will not show spinal cord damage.
XI-40. The answer is C.   (Chap. 383)   The inﬂammatory myopathies (polymyositis, dermato-
myositis, and inclusion body myositis) are associated with unique clinical features. Inclu-sion body myositis is usually seen in patients ≥50 years and initially involves the distal
muscles, especially the foot extensors and ﬁnger ﬂexors. Atrophy is seen along with weak-ness as this inﬂammatory myopathy runs a slowly progressive course, compared to poly-myositis or dermatomyositis. Polymyositis is a rare disorder that usually involves theproximal not distal muscles. It is a diagnosis of exclusion after a thorough medical exam-ination and muscle biopsy. Dermatomyositis is distinguished by the classic heliotroperash and associated skin ﬁndings, which may precede the development of clinical muscu-lar weakness. Eosinophilic myofasciitis is associated with myalgias, skin induration, fa-tigue, and eosinophilia in the peripheral blood as well as in endomysial tissue.Hyperthyroidism would cause a reduced TSH. It may cause weakness, but is generally as-sociated with other ﬁndings such as tremor, skin changes, and irritability.
XI-41. The answer is B.   (Chap. 381)   In myasthenia gravis, the primary defect is decreased
number of available ACh receptors in the postsynaptic neuron at the neuromuscularjunction (NMJ). This occurs as a result of antibody-mediated cross-linking of the AChreceptor, which causes increased turnover of ACh receptors, blockage of the active site,and damage to the postsynaptic muscle. The defect is not due to a defect in the release ofACh. Low levels of ACh-esterase would cause increased activation at the NMJ. Finally, thedefect in myasthenia gravis occurs at the NMJ, not at nerve synapses.
XI-42. The answer is E.   (Chap. 363)   Simple partial seizures cause motor, sensory, autonomic,
or psychic symptoms without an obvious alteration in consciousness. The phenomenon ofabnormal motor movements beginning in a restricted area then progressing to involve alarger area is termed Jacksonian march . The patient is describing T odd’s paralysis, which
may take minutes to many hours to return to normal. Although meningitis is a commoncause of seizure in young patients, it is unlikely to be the cause in someone who has aknown seizure disorder. If his symptoms were to persist beyond many hours, it would bereasonable to investigate a different etiology of his hand weakness with imaging studies.Overt deﬁcits in strength are not compatible with a primary psychiatric disorder. Magneticresonance angiogram and cerebral angiogram are useful to evaluate for cerebrovasculardisorders, but there is no evidence of subarachnoid bleeding or vasculitis.
XI-43. The answer is C.   (Chap. 376)   The release of bacterial cell wall components after killing
by antibiotics may evoke a marked inﬂammatory cytokine response in the subarachnoidspace. This inﬂammation may lead to increased damage of the blood brain barrier andcentral nervous system damage. Glucocorticoids can blunt this response by inhibiting tu-mor necrosis factor and interleukin-1. They work best if administered before antibiotics.Clinical trials have demonstrated that dexamethasone, 10 mg IV administered 20 min b
e-
fore antibiotics, reduced unfavorable outcomes, including death. The dexamethasone
was continued for 4 days. The beneﬁts were most striking in pneumococcal meningitis.Because this is the most common cause of meningitis in the elderly, empirical coverageshould include this intervention as well. Empirical antibiotics in this case should includea third-generation cephalosporin, vancomycin, and ampicillin. However, dexamethasonemay decrease vancomycin penetration into the CSF, so its use should be considered care-fully in cases where the most likely organism requires vancomycin coverage.
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 445
XI-44. The answer is E.   (Chap. 15)   This patient has typical symptoms of migraine headaches
without concerning features for an underlying disorder. Speciﬁcally, there is no report of
worsening severity of headaches, fever, intractable vomiting, or abnormal neurologic ex-amination that would be worrisome for an intracranial process. Vertigo is not an indica-tion of a more serious intracranial process, as an estimated 33% of individuals withmigraine experience vertigo both with and without accompanying headache. Therefore,imaging of the brain is unnecessary in this clinical situation. Migraine headaches are thesecond most common headache syndromes after tension headaches and affect 15% ofwomen and 6% of men. The onset of headaches is usually in late adolescence, with peakprevalence of migraine occurring in the mid-thirties. Migraine headaches are typicallyclassiﬁed as occurring with aura (previously called classic migraine ) or without an aura. A
more simpliﬁed diagnostic criterion for migraine has been adopted by the InternationalHeadache Society. Migraine is deﬁned as repeated attacks of headache lasting 4–72 h in in-dividuals with a normal physical examination. T o be classiﬁed as a migraine, the head-aches must fulﬁll at least two of the following symptoms: unilateral pain, throbbingquality, aggravation by movement, and moderate to severe intensity. At least one addi-tional accompanying feature should be present, including either nausea/vomiting, phono-phobia, or photophobia. Patient education and trigger avoidance are important in themanagement of migraine headaches. Migraines can frequently be controlled, but noteliminated, by lifestyle modiﬁcations, and it is important to understand an individual’striggers for migraine. A headache diary will help identify patterns of headaches as well astriggers. It will also provide an estimate of headache frequency and severity to aid in deter-mining whether prophylactic medication would be required. Other nonpharmacologictreatment of migraines includes regular exercise, maintain a regular sleep-wake cycle, andstressor avoidance. Y oga, biofeedback, hypnosis, and meditation are interventions thatmay help alleviate stress and may have beneﬁt in migraine treatment. Once an acute mi-graine is experienced, timely treatment is warranted to decrease the duration of the attackand minimize loss of productivity. If attacks are mild, analgesics such as nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs or acetaminophen may be useful. However, the most effective drugsfor the treatment of moderate to severe migraines are the 5-hydroxytriptamine agonists—ergotamines and the triptan drugs. Rizatriptan and almotriptan are the most efﬁcacious ofthe triptan drugs. If migraine attacks occur more than ﬁve times monthly or are poorly re-sponsive to abortive treatment, additional drug therapy for prevention is indicated.
XI-45. The answer is D.   (Chap. 361)   Cranial nerve XI (accessory nerve) is correctly paired
with the proper examination technique. T esting cranial nerve I (olfactory nerve) shouldbe performed with a mild stimulus (e.g., coffee or toothpaste) to eliminate any potentialstimulation of pain ﬁbers in the nasopharynx (trigeminal nerve) by noxious stimuli suchas ammonia or alcohol. When testing visual acuity (cranial nerve II), corrective lensesshould be worn by the patient, if necessary. This allows for testing of the neuronal aspectsof vision without confounding by problems within the lens. It is also important to testeach eye individually. The trigeminal (cranial nerve V) is predominantly a sensory nerveand has three sensory branches. The motor component of the trigeminal nerve predomi-nantly innervates the masseter muscles used for chewing. Eyebrow elevation and fore-head wrinkling are functions of cranial nerve VII.
XI-46. The answer is C.   (Chap. 381)   This patient’s presentation with facial and ocular weakness
in a nocturnal pattern is consistent with a typical presentation of myasthenia gravis. It is notuncommon for symptoms to be mostly nocturnal and be relatively asymptomatic in theearly morning hours. Examining these patients in the evening or doing repetitive strengthtesting may bring out more subtle ﬁndings and requires a heightened index of suspicion.Lead poisoning would be uncommon in a woman of this age, and the ﬁndings would notbe restricted to the cranial region. Psychiatric diagnoses do not correlate with myastheniagravis, and repeat examination to corroborate the reported physical examination should beperformed ﬁrst. MRI of the brain is not indicated at this time as the physical examinationﬁndings point towards a serologic diagnosis. Slit-lamp examination is useful for ﬁnding ab-normalities in the anterior portion of the eye, such as the iris, lens, and cornea.
446 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-47. The answer is C.   (Chap. 363)   Nuchal rigidity and an elevated white blood cell count is
very concerning for meningitis as the etiology for this patient, and lumbar puncture must
be performed to rule this out. In addition, acute cocaine intoxication is a plausible reasonfor this new-onset seizure. The ﬁgure below illustrates the evaluation of the adult patientwith a seizure. MRI would be indicated if the patient had a negative metabolic and toxico-logic screening. Substance abuse counseling, while indicated, is not indicated at this point
FIGURE XI-47 Evaluation of the adult patient with a seizure. CBC, complete blood count; CT,
computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; EEG, electroencephalogram; CNS,
central nervous system.NormalAdult Patient with a Seizure
History of epilepsy; currently treated
  with antiepileptics
Assess: adequacy of antiepileptic therapy  Side effects  Serum levelsNo history of epilepsy
Laboratory studies
  CBC  Electrolytes, calcium, magnesium  Serum glucose  Liver and renal function tests  Urinalysis  Toxicology screen
Negative
metabolic screenPositive metabolic screen
or symptoms/signssuggesting a metabolicor infectious disorder  Electrolytes  CBC  Liver and renal function tests  Toxicology screen
Abnormal or change inneurologic exam
  Treat identifiable
  metabolic abnormalitiesAssess cause of  neurologic change  Lumbar puncture  Cultures  Endocrine studies  CT  MRI if focal   features presentMRI scan or  EEG
Subtherapeutic
antiepilepticlevels
Appropriate
increase orresumptionof doseIncrease antiepileptic
therapy to maximumtolerated dose;consider alternativeantiepileptic drugsTherapeutic
antiepilepticlevelsFocal features of 
seizures
Focal abnormalities
on clinical or labexamination
Other evidence of
neurologicdysfunctionTreat underlying
metabolic abnormality
Idiopathic seizures
Treat underlying disorder
Ye s No
Consider: Mass lesion; stroke; CNS infection;  trauma; degenerative disease
Consider: Antiepileptic therapyConsider
Further work-upOther causes of episodic cerebral dysfunctionSyncope
Transient ischemic attack
Migraine
Acute psychosisHistory
Physical examination
Exclude
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
Consider: Antiepileptic therapy
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 447
in his workup since he is postictal. The patient is not having seizures, does not have a
known seizure disorder, and has not been treated for the underlying metabolic abnormal-ity, making intravenous loading with an antiepileptic medication premature at this time.
XI-48. The answer is D.   (Chap. 382)   Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophy are both X-
linked recessive disorders associated with different mutations of the dystrophin gene lo-cated on the short arm of the X chromosome. This 2000-kb gene is among the largestidentiﬁed human genes. In both Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the mostcommon mutation is a deletion. However, deletions in Becker muscular dystrophy do notresult in frame-shift mutations, yielding a delayed presentation and milder presentationof disease. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy designates a clinical syndrome that presentsas progressive weakness of pelvic and shoulder girdle muscles. There are 12 recognizedlimb-girdle muscular dystrophies with unique mutations. This disorder can be inheritedin both an autosomal dominant or recessive fashion, depending on the mutation present.Kearns-Sayre syndrome and myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red ﬁbers (MERFF) are mi-tochondrial myopathies. Each mitochondrion possesses a DNA genome unique from thenuclear genome and is inherited primarily from the oocytes, accounting for the maternalinheritance of mitochondrial disorders. Kearns-Sayre syndrome is a multisystem disorderwith chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO). Varying degrees of proximalmuscle weakness are present. MERFF presents in late childhood to adulthood with clini-cal features of myoclonic epilepsy, progressive weakness, and cerebellar ataxia.
XI-49. The answer is B.   (Chap. 268)   Brain death is deﬁned by the cessation of cerebral func-
tion while somatic function is maintained by artiﬁcial means and the heart continues topump. It is the only type of brain damage that is considered equivalent to death. The diag-nosis of brain death should be conﬁrmed with the following clinical ﬁndings: unrespon-siveness to any stimuli, indicating widespread cortical destruction; brainstem damage, asevidenced by enlarged or mid-sized pupils without light reaction; absent corneal and ocu-lovestibular reﬂexes; and apnea, indicating medullary destruction. The heart rate shouldbe invariant. Because the spinal cord is intact, spinal reﬂexes may be present. The presenceor absence of the Babinski sign does not contribute to the diagnosis of brain death. Centraldiabetes insipidus occurs with dysfunction of the hypothalamus or posterior pituitary. Ithas been described in patients with brain death but is not a component of the diagnosis.
XI-50. The answer is B.   (Chap. 15)   Cluster headaches, which can cause excruciating hemicranial
pain, are notable for their occurrence during characteristic episodes. Usually attacks occurduring a 4- to 8-week period in which the patient experiences one to three severe brief head-aches daily. There may then be a prolonged pain-free interval before the next episode. Men be-tween ages 20 and 50 are most commonly affected. The unilateral pain is usually associatedwith lacrimation, eye reddening, nasal stufﬁness, ptosis, and nausea. During episodes alcoholmay provoke the attacks. Even though the pain caused by brain tumors may awaken a patientfrom sleep, the typical history and normal neurologic examination do not mandate evaluationfor a neoplasm of the central nervous system. Acute therapy for a cluster headache attack con-sists of oxygen inhalation, although intranasal lidocaine and subcutaneous sumatriptan mayalso be effective. Prophylactic therapy with prednisone, lithium, methysergide, ergotamine, orverapamil can be administered during an episode to prevent further cluster headache attacks.
XI-51. The answer is C.   (Chap. 371)   Trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical diagnosis based entirely
on patient history, and as such should be treated once a patient comes with the virtuallypathognomonic complaints of paroxysms of excruciating pain in the lips, gums, cheeks,and chin that resolve over seconds to minutes. Carbamazepine is ﬁrst-line therapy, fol-lowed by phenytoin for the ~30–50% of patients who do not respond adequately to ther-apy. Surgical approaches, such as radiofrequency thermal rhizotomy, gamma-kniferadiosurgery, and microvascular decompression, should be considered only when medi-cal options fail. Steroids have no therapeutic role, as trigeminal neuralgia is not an in-ﬂammatory condition. Neuroimaging is not indicated, unless other clinical features or afocal neurologic deﬁcit elicited on history or physical examination suggest another possi-ble diagnosis such as intracranial mass or multiple sclerosis.
448 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-52. The answer is C.   (Chap. 380)   The patient fulﬁlls the diagnostic criteria for Guillain-
Barré syndrome (GBS) with progressive weakness of two or more limbs, areﬂexia, disease
course <4 weeks, and no other identiﬁable cause. Other characteristic features includelack of a fever, symmetric weakness, and minimal sensory symptoms. The diagnosis isfurther suggested by an antecedent gastrointestinal illness. In the United States, 20–30%of all cases of GBS are associated with a preceding infection with Campylobacter jejuni .
This patient also has evidence of impending respiratory failure from neuromuscularweakness manifested by tachypnea, accessory muscle use, and paradoxical respiration.His arterial blood gas shows a respiratory alkalosis with an increase in the A – a gradientto 33 mmHg. His vital capacity is 12.5 mL/kg body weight. Laboratory ﬁndings would in-clude normal serum chemistries with an increased cerebrospinal ﬂuid protein withoutpleocytosis. Electromyography would show evidence of demyelination. Treatment forthis individual should include endotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation inaddition to IVIg or plasmapheresis. IVIg is administered as ﬁve daily infusions of 2 g/kgbody weight. Plasmapheresis is equally effective in treating GBS and is performed fourtimes over the ﬁrst week. Mechanical ventilation is indicated in GBS when the vital ca-pacity <20 mL/kg (ND Lawn et al: Arch Neurol 58(6):893, 2001 ). There is no role for glu-
cocorticoids in the treatment of GBS. Ciproﬂoxacin is an effective treatment to decreasesymptom duration in C. jejuni  infection if given early in the course of the illness, but has
no effect in treatment of GBS following C. jejuni  infection. Botulism also presents as an
ascending symmetric paralysis. Cranial nerves are more frequently involved than in GBS.In this patient, there is no associated risk factor for botulism such as home-canned foodsor injection wounds from drug use.
XI-53. The answer is E.   (Chap. 364)   Cardioembolism accounts for up to 20% of all ischemic
strokes. Stroke caused by heart disease is due to thrombotic material forming on theatrial or ventricular wall or the left heart valves. If the thrombus lyses quickly, only a tran-sient ischemic attack may develop. If the arterial occlusion lasts longer, brain tissue maydie and a stroke will occur. Emboli from the heart most often lodge in the middle cerebralartery (MCA), the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), or one of their branches. Atrial ﬁbril-lation is the most common cause of cerebral embolism overall. Other signiﬁcant causesof cardioembolic stroke include myocardial infarction, prosthetic valves, rheumatic heartdisease, and dilated cardiomyopathy. Furthermore, paradoxical embolization may occurwhen an atrial septal defect or a patent foramen ovale exists. This may be detected bybubble-contrast echocardiography. Bacterial endocarditis may cause septic emboli if thevegetation is on the left side of the heart or if there is a paradoxical source.
XI-54. The answer is B.   (Chap. 16)   The crossed straight leg raise is positive when ﬂexion of
one leg reproduces the pain in the opposite leg or buttocks. This sign is more speciﬁc fordisk herniation than the straight leg raise. The nerve or nerve root lesion is always on theside of the pain. The straight leg raise test is positive if passive ﬂexion of the leg repro-duces the patient’s usual back pain. The reverse straight leg raise is performed by stand-ing the patient next to the examination table and passively extending the leg with theknee ﬂexed. This maneuver stretches the L2-L4 nerve roots. Back pain referred from vis-ceral organs may be palpated on abdominal examination but should not be reproducedby straight leg raise. Passive dorsiﬂexion of the foot during the straight leg raise will addto the stretch but does not add any more diagnostic information.
XI-55. The answer is D.   (Chap. 374)   This ﬁgure illustrates a mass attached to the meninges
with a dural tail. Other dural tumors may appear this way, but of the options listed, themeningioma is by far the most likely to appear this way. Meningiomas derive from thecells that give rise to the arachnoid granulations. They are usually benign and attached tothe dura. They rarely invade the brain. They are more frequent in women than men andhave a peak incidence in middle age. T otal surgical resection of a meningioma is curative.Low-grade astrocytoma and high-grade astrocytoma (glioblastoma) often inﬁltrate intoadjacent brain and rarely have the clear margins seen in this ﬁgure. Oligodendroma com-prise ~15% of all gliomas and show calciﬁcation in roughly 30% of cases. They have a
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 449
more benign course and are more responsive than other gliomas to cytotoxic therapy. For
low-grade oligodendromas, the median survival is 7–8 years. Brain abscess will have dis-tinctive ring-enhancing features with a capsule, often have mass effect, and will have evi-dence of inﬂammation on MRI scanning.
XI-56. The answer is B.   (Chap. 363)   Optimal medical therapy for epilepsy depends on the un-
derlying cause, type of seizure, and patient factors. The goal is to prevent seizures andminimize the side effects of therapy. The minimal effective dose is determined by trial anderror. In choosing medical therapies, drug interactions are a key consideration. Certainmedications, such as tricyclic antidepressants, may lower the seizure threshold and shouldbe avoided. Patients who respond well to medical therapy and have completely controlledseizures are good candidates for the discontinuation of therapy, with about 70% of chil-dren and 60% of adults being able to discontinue therapy eventually. Patient factors thataid in this include complete medical control of seizures for 1 to 5 years, a normal neuro-logic examination, a normal EEG, and single seizure type. On the other end of the spec-trum, about 20% of these patients are completely refractory to medical therapy andshould be considered for surgical therapy. In the best examples, such as mesial temporalsclerosis, resection of the temporal lobe may result in about 70% of these patients becom-ing seizure free and an additional 15 to 25% having a signiﬁcant reduction in the inci-dence of seizures. In patients with epilepsy other considerations are critical. Psychosocialsequelae such as depression, anxiety, and behavior problems may occur. Approximately20% of epileptic patients have depression, with their suicide rate being higher than that ofage-matched controls. There is an impact on the ability to drive, perform certain jobs, andfunction in social situations. Furthermore, there is a twofold to threefold increase in mor-tality for patients with epilepsy compared with age-matched controls. Although most ofthe increased mortality results from the underlying etiology of epilepsy, a signiﬁcant num-ber of these patients die from accidents, status epilepticus, and a syndrome known as sud-den unexpected death in epileptic patients (SUDEP). The cause is unknown, but researchhas centered on brainstem-mediated effects of seizures on cardiopulmonary function.
XI-57. The answer is D.   (Chap. 364)   Nonrheumatic atrial ﬁbrillation is the most common cause
of cerebral embolism overall. The presumed stroke mechanism is thrombus formation in theﬁbrillating atrium or atrial appendage. The average annual risk of stroke is around 5%. How-ever, the risk varies with certain factors: age, hypertension, left ventricular function, prior em-bolism, diabetes, and thyroid function. Patients younger than 60 years of age withoutstructural heart disease or without one of these risk factors have a very low annual risk of car-dioembolism: less than 0.5%. Therefore, it is recommended that these patients only take aspi-rin daily for stroke prevention. Older patients with numerous risk factors may have annualstroke risks of 10 to 15% and must take warfarin indeﬁnitely. Cardioversion is indicated forsymptomatic patients who want an initial opportunity to remain in sinus rhythm. However,studies have shown that there is an increased stroke risk for weeks to months after a successfulcardioversion, and these patients must remain on anticoagulation for a long period. Similarly,recent studies have shown that patients who do not respond to cardioversion and do not wantcatheter ablation have mortality and morbidity with rate control and anticoagulation similarto those of patients who opt for cardioversion. Low-molecular-weight heparin may be used asa bridge to warfarin therapy and may facilitate outpatient anticoagulation in selected patients.
XI-58. The answer is D.   (Chap. 382)   There are two recognized clinical forms of myotonic dys-
trophy, both of which are characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance. Myotonic dys-trophy 1 (DM1) is the most common form and the most likely disorder in this patient.Characteristic clinical features of this disorder include a “hatchet-faced” appearance, due towasting of the facial muscles, and weakness of the neck muscles. In contrast to the musculardystrophies (Becker and Duchenne), distal limb muscle weakness is more common inDM1. Palatal, pharyngeal, and tongue involvement are also common and produce the dys-arthric voice that is frequently heard. The failure of relaxation after a forced hand grip ischaracteristic of myotonia. Myotonia can also be elicited by percussion of the thenar emi-nence. In most individuals, myotonia is present by age 5, but clinical symptoms of weakness
450 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
that lead to diagnosis may not be present until adulthood. Cardiac conduction abnormali-
ties and heart failure are also common in myotonic dystrophy. Diagnosis can often be madeby clinical features alone in an individual with classic symptoms and a positive family his-tory. An electromyogram would conﬁrm myotonia. Genetic testing for DM1 would show acharacteristic trinucleotide repeat on chromosome 19. Genetic anticipation occurs with anincreasing number of repeats and worsening clinical disease over successive generations.Myotonic dystrophy 2 (DM2) causes proximal muscle weakness primarily and is alsoknown by the name proximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM). Other features of the diseaseoverlap with DM1. Acid maltase deﬁciency (glucosidase deﬁciency, or Pompe’s disease) hasthree recognized forms, only one of which has onset in adulthood. In the adult-onset form,respiratory muscle weakness is prominent and often is the presenting symptoms. As statedpreviously, Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophies present with primarily proximalmuscle weakness and are X-linked recessive disorders. Becker muscular dystrophy presentsat a later age than Duchenne muscular dystrophy and has a more prolonged course. Other-wise, features are similar to one another. Nemaline myopathy is a heterogeneous disordermarked by the threadlike appearance of muscle ﬁbers on biopsy. Nemaline myopathy usu-ally presents in childhood and has a striking facial appearance similar to myotonic dystro-phy with a long, narrow face. This disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion.
XI-59. The answer is D.   (Chap. 363)   Adolescence and early adulthood mark the period where
idiopathic or genetic epilepsy syndromes become less common and seizures due to ac-quired CNS lesions become more common. The most common causes of seizures in theyoung adults are head trauma, central nervous system (CNS) infections, brain tumors,congenital CNS lesions, illicit drug use, or alcohol withdrawal. Fever rarely causes seizurein patients >12 years. Amyloid angiopathy and uremia are more common in older adults.
XI-60. The answer is B.   (Chap. 378)   Startle myoclonus is a worrisome sign but is not speciﬁc
for CJD, though it is more so if it occurs during sleep. Lewy body dementia, Alzheimer’sdisease, central nervous system infections, and myoclonic epilepsy can all cause myoclo-nus. EEG and MRI can both help differentiate CJD from these disorders. The MRI ﬁnd-ing of cortical ribboning and intensity in the basal ganglia on ﬂuid-attenuated inversionrecovery sequences are characteristic of CJD. EEG is useful if stereotypical periodic burstsevery 1–2 s are present, but this is seen in only 60% of cases, and other ﬁndings may beless speciﬁc. Demonstration of speciﬁc immunoassays for proteolytic products of dis-ease-causing prion proteins (PrP
Sc) at brain biopsy may be necessary to conﬁrm diagno-
sis in some cases. However, these proteins are not uniformly distributed throughout thebrain and false-negative biopsies occur. Both surgeons and pathologists must be warnedto use standard precautions under these circumstances. These proteins cannot be meas-ured from cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). CSF in CJD is usually normal except for a mini-mally elevated protein. Many patients with CJD have elevated CSF stress protein 14-3-3.This test alone is neither sensitive nor speciﬁc, as patients with herpes simplex virus en-cephalitis, multi-infarct dementia, and stroke may have similar elevations.
XI-61. The answer is D.   (Chap. 23)   The ventral spinal cord includes the corticospinal tracts,
spinothalamic tracts, and descending autonomic tracts. Disruption of these tracts causesweakness/areﬂexia, loss of pain/temperature sensation, and bladder sphincter dysfunc-tion, respectively. The dorsal columns include vibratory sense and proprioception, whichare spared in the ventral cord syndrome. Other causes of the syndrome include disc her-niation, radiation myelitis, and human T-lymphocyte virus 1 infection.
XI-62. The answer is C.   (Chap. 383)   This patient’s skin ﬁndings are an example of Gottron’s
sign of the hands and the heliotrope facial rash of dermatomyositis. Usually the rash pre-cedes the muscular weakness. In addition to the V-sign, as described in the scenario, onecan also see the shawl sign, in which the erythematous rash is found around the shouldersand posterior neck region. In addition to the skin manifestations, skeletal muscle weakness,particularly the proximal muscles, is part of the presentation of dermatomyositis. Extra-muscular manifestations include constitutional symptoms, joint contractures, dysphagia,cardiac disturbances, pulmonary dysfunction, and arthralgias. Hepatosplenomegaly is not
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 451
an associated clinical ﬁnding. Situs inversus is not associated with dermatomyositis. Hy-
pothyroidism is associated with delayed deep tendon relaxation. In hypothyroidism theskin appears swollen, dry, and coarse with a cool waxy appearance. Subcutaneous noduleson the elbows, back of the forearms, and metacarpophalangeal joints of the hands are char-acteristic of rheumatoid arthritis, particularly in the active phase.
XI-63. The answer is D.   (Chap. 29)   This patient has acute angle-closure glaucoma resulting from
obstruction of the outﬂow of aqueous humor at the iris. The buildup of intraocular pressurecan be conﬁrmed by measurement and requires urgent treatment with hyperosmotic agents.Permanent treatment requires laser or surgical iridotomy. Angle-closure glaucoma is lesscommon than is primary open-angle glaucoma, which is asymptomatic and is usually detect-able only through measurements of intraocular pressure at a routine eye examination.
XI-64. The answer is D.   (Chap. 379)   CMT disease is a heterogeneous group of inherited pe-
ripheral neuropathies. Transmission is usually autosomal dominant but may be recessiveor X-linked. Numerous genetic defects are associated with CMT disease. It is very com-mon, affecting up to 1 in 2500 persons. Clinically, patients usually present in the ﬁrst orsecond decade of life, but later presentations may occur. The neuropathy affects both mo-tor and sensory nerves. Symptoms may vary, ranging from distal muscle weakness andsevere atrophy and disability to only pes cavus and minimal weakness. Although sensoryﬁndings and involvement are common, these patients often do not have dominant sen-sory complaints. However, if patients have no evidence of sensory involvement on de-tailed neurologic examination or electrodiagnostic studies, an alternative diagnosisshould be considered. There is no known effective therapy for CMT disease. Orthoticsand physical therapy are mainstays for preserving function.
XI-65. The answer is C.   (Chap. 322)   Neurologic manifestations are present in 5–10% of indi-
viduals with sarcoidosis and are the presenting complaint in up to 50% of individuals whohave neurologic involvement of sarcoidosis. Any part of the systemic or central nervous sys-tem (CNS) can be affected by neurosarcoidosis. The most common manifestations are cra-nial nerve involvement, basilar meningitis, myelopathy, and anterior hypothalamic disease.Peripheral facial nerve palsy develops in >50% of individuals with neurosarcoidosis at somepoint, but may resolve spontaneously and be misdiagnosed as Bell’s palsy, an idiopathic fa-cial nerve palsy. Bilateral facial nerve palsy can occur with neurologic manifestations of sar-coidosis, but it is rare for any other disease to cause bilateral disease. In this patient, thepresence of bilateral facial nerve weakness strongly suggests neurologic involvement withsarcoidosis. In addition, the presence of hilar adenopathy also strengthens the likelihoodthat sarcoidosis is the cause of the patient’s bilateral facial nerve palsy. On MRI imaging,neurosarcoidosis shows gadolinium enhancement of the affected neurologic structures. Inthis case, bilateral seventh nerve enhancement and meningeal enhancement is seen. Space-occupying lesions can also be demonstrated if parenchymal disease occurs. Analysis of thecerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) most often demonstrates lymphocytic meningitis with mildly in-creased CSF protein and normal CSF glucose levels. Identifying disease outside of the CNSis important for making the deﬁnitive diagnosis by biopsy. If the presence of noncaseatinggranulomas can be demonstrated by biopsy of the lungs or enlarged lymph nodes, diagno-sis can be established and treatment initiated without the need for invasive diagnostic test-ing of the neurologic tissue involved. Treatment of neurologic involvement of sarcoidosisusually requires oral prednisone at doses of 0.5 mg/kg daily. Higher doses of glucocorticoidsor additional cytotoxic therapies such as cyclophosphamide may be necessary for severeneurologic disease. Lyme disease is also a frequent cause of peripheral facial nerve paralysis.However, it is rare for Lyme disease to cause bilateral palsy, and this patient does not live inan area that is known to have prevalent Lyme disease. He lives in an urban environment andreports no exposures that would make Lyme disease more likely. In addition, Lyme diseasewould not explain the pulmonary abnormalities seen by chest radiograph. Multiple sclero-sis does not commonly cause facial nerve palsy. Optic neuritis is a frequent presenting com-plaint in multiple sclerosis as well as in neurologic sarcoidosis, and it can be difﬁcult todifferentiate between the two diseases in the setting of optic neuritis. If optic neuritis is
452 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
present, demonstration of disease outside the CNS is important for diagnosing sarcoidosis
as the cause. While tuberculous meningitis may present with multiple cranial nerve palsies,it is unlikely in this patient who is otherwise well. Tuberculous meningitis typically presentswith fevers, headache, and altered mental status. However, a protracted illness with lethargyand memory loss can be seen. The CSF evaluation is also not consistent with tuberculosis.Lymphocytic meningitis with markedly elevated protein and very low glucose would be ex-pected. Likewise, viral meningitis should present with an acute illness with fever, headache,neck stiffness, and photophobia. While idiopathic Bell’s palsy is thought to be related toherpes simples virus 1 infection, demonstration of meningeal involvement in cases of Bell’spalsy is rare in this setting.
XI-66. The answer is D.   (Chap. 376)   Listeria  has become an increasingly important cause of
bacterial meningitis in neonates (<1 month of age), pregnant women, individuals >60years old, and immunocompromised individuals. Infection is acquired by eating contam-inated foods such as unpasteurized dairy products, cole slaw, milk, soft cheeses, delicates-sen meats, and uncooked hot dogs. Ampicillin is the agent most often added to the initialempirical regimen to cover L. monocytogenes .
XI-67. The answer is E.   (Chap. 268)   Foraminal herniation, which forces the cerebellar tonsils
into the foramen magnum, leads to compression of the medulla and subsequent respira-tory arrest. Central transtentorial herniation occurs when the medial thalamus com-presses the midbrain as it moves through the tentorial opening; miotic pupils anddrowsiness are the classic clinical signs. A locked-in state is usually caused by infarctionor hemorrhage of the ventral pons; other causes include Guillain-Barré syndrome andcertain neuromuscular blocking agents. Catatonia is a semi-awake state seen most fre-quently as a manifestation of psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia. Third-nerve pal-sies arise from an uncal transtentorial herniation where the anterior medial temporalgyrus herniates into the anterior portion of the tentorial opening anterior to the adjacentmidbrain. Coma may occur due to compression of the midbrain.
XI-68. The answer is D.   (Chap. 371)   Brief paroxysms of severe, sharp pains in the face without
demonstrable lesions in the jaw, teeth, or sinuses are called tic douloureux, or trigeminal neu-ralgia. The pain may be brought on by stimuli applied to the face, lips, or tongue or by certainmovements of those structures. Aneurysms, neuroﬁbromas, and meningiomas impinging onthe ﬁfth cranial nerve at any point during its course typically present with trigeminal neurop-athy, which will cause sensory loss on the face, weakness of the jaw muscles, or both; neithersymptom is demonstrable in this patient. The treatment for this idiopathic condition is car-bamazepine or phenytoin if carbamazepine is not tolerated. When drug treatment is not suc-cessful, surgical therapy, including the commonly applied percutaneous retrogasserianrhizotomy, may be effective. A possible complication of this procedure is partial facial numb-ness with a risk of corneal anesthesia, which increases the potential for ulceration.
XI-69. The answer is C.   (Chap. 381)   Except for lumbar puncture, all of the options listed are
indicated at this time. Thymic abnormalities are present in 75% of patients with myasthe-nia gravis. A CT or MRI of the mediastinum may show enlargement or neoplastic changesin the thymus and is recommended upon diagnosis. Hyperthyroidism occurs in 3–8% ofpatients with myasthenia gravis and may aggravate weakness. T esting for rheumatoid fac-tor and antinuclear antibodies should also be obtained because of the association of myas-thenia gravis to other autoimmune diseases. Due to side effects of immunosuppressivetherapy, a thorough evaluation should be undertaken to rule out latent or chronic infec-tions such as tuberculosis. Measurements of ventilatory function are valuable as a baselinebecause of the frequency and seriousness of respiratory impairment in myasthenic pa-tients, and they can be used as an objective measure of response to therapy.
XI-70. The answer is D.   (Chap. 373)   Hemorrhages beneath the dural layer (subdural) or be-
tween the skull and the dura (epidural) are common sequelae of head trauma. They canbe life-threatening, and prompt evaluation and management are imperative. Several clin-ical features allow these conditions to be distinguished from one another. Acute subdural
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 453
hematomas typically arise from venous sources, often the bridging veins located immedi-
ately under the dura mater. As the brain volume decreases with age, traction on thesevenous structures increases and even minor head trauma in the elderly can lead to a sub-dural hematoma. Approximately 33% of patients with an acute subdural bleed will expe-rience a lucid interval after the event, which is followed by obtundation. Subduralbleeding is typically slower than epidural bleeding due to their different sources. Smallsubdural bleeds are asymptomatic and often do not require evacuation. Epidural hema-tomas, on the other hand, can arise quickly and typically represent arterial bleeding.They are often caused by a lacerated middle meningeal artery from an overlying skullfracture. Rapid increase in intracranial pressure from these bleeds can necessitate arterialligation or emergent craniotomy. Most patients with epidural bleeding are unconsciouswhen ﬁrst evaluated; a “lucid interval” can occasionally be seen.
XI-71. The answer is C.   (Chap. 371)   Pain, loss of function (without clear-cut sensory or motor
deﬁcits), and a localized autonomic impairment are called reﬂex sympathetic dystrophy(also known as shoulder-hand syndrome or causalgia). Precipitating events in this unusualsyndrome include myocardial infarction, shoulder trauma, and limb paralysis. In additionto the neuropathic-type pain, autonomic dysfunction, possibly resulting from neuroadren-ergic and cholinergic hypersensitivity, produces localized sweating, changes in blood ﬂow,and abnormal hair and nail growth as well as edema or atrophy of the affected limb. Treat-ment is difﬁcult; however, anticonvulsants such as phenytoin and carbamazepine may beeffective, as they are in other conditions in which neuropathic pain is a major problem.
XI-72. The answer is B.   (Chap. 15)   The peak prevalence of migraine headaches occurs in the
fourth to ﬁfth decades of life. Many women experience decreased severity and frequencyof headaches after menopause, and some individuals cease to have migraines as they age.Migraine has been demonstrated to be a risk factor for ischemic stroke in both men andwomen ( M Etminan et al: BMJ 330: 63, 2005 ;T Kurth et al: Neurology 64: 1020, 2005 ;JE
Buring et al: Arch Neurol 52: 129, 1995 ). In addition, women who have migraine with
aura appear to be at greater risk of ischemic stroke if they are concurrently taking oralcontraceptives. The American College of Gynecology has recommended that women whoare >35 or have focal neurologic symptoms with their migraine attacks should not takeoral contraceptives (Int J Gynaecol Obstet 75: 93, 2001 ), but low-dose contraceptive can
otherwise be taken safely in women with migraine headaches. Any risk factors that areknown to increase stroke risk such as hypertension or cigarette smoking also contributeto stroke in individuals with migraine. Interestingly, asymptomatic women with mi-graines have been shown to have a greater likelihood of white matter changes on MRI,and those with aura had a signiﬁcant increased risk of subclinical posterior circulationinfarcts (MC Kruit et al: JAMA 291: 427, 2004 ).
XI-73. The answer is A.   (Chap. 22)   This patient has classic symptoms and history consistent
with Ménière’s disease. Patients have recurrent unilateral labyrinthine dysfunctionmarked by hearing loss and tinnitus. The symptoms are very debilitating, and patientsmay be incapacitated by the tinnitus and vertigo. The severity and recurrent nature sug-gest Ménière’s disease and argue against a central process. Ménière’s disease responds todiuretic therapy and/or a low-salt diet. In addition, patients should attempt to ambulatein an attempt to induce central compensatory mechanisms. Scopolamine transdermalpatches and anticholinergic medications are useful only for motion sickness. The Epleyprocedure attempts to reposition particulate debris within the semicircular canals such asin benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Glucocorticoids are useful for the acute treat-ment of vertigo but are used only in the acute setting and have no role in the long-termtreatment of Ménière’s disease. Metoclopramide may be used to treat nausea but has norole in the tinnitus and vertigo of Ménière’s disease.
XI-74. The answer is E.   (Chap. 368)   Cerebellar ataxia with a strong family history suggests
one of the autosomal spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA). SCA7 is distinguished from all of theother SCAs by the presence of retinal pigmentary degeneration. The visual abnormalitiesﬁrst appear as blue-yellow color blindness and proceed to frank visual loss with macular
454 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
degeneration. Proliferative retinopathy would be expected in someone who has poorly
controlled diabetes. Lipemia retinalis is often seen in patients with hypertriglyceridemia.Papilledema is seen in increased intracranial pressure, which is not present in SCA.
XI-75. The answer is E.   (Chap. 364)   Numerous studies have identiﬁed key risk factors for is-
chemic stroke. Old age, family history, diabetes, hypertension, tobacco smoking, andcholesterol are all risk factors for atherosclerosis and therefore stroke. Hypertension is themost signiﬁcant among these risk factors. All cases of hypertension must be controlled inthe setting of stroke prevention. Antiplatelet therapy has been shown to reduce the risk ofvascular atherothrombotic events. The overall relative risk reduction of nonfatal stroke isabout 25 to 30% across most large clinical trials. The “true” absolute beneﬁt is dependenton the individual patient’s risk; therefore, patients with a low risk for stroke (e.g.,younger, with minimal cardiovascular risk factors) may have a relative risk reductionwith antiplatelet therapy but a meaningless “beneﬁt.” Numerous studies have shown thebeneﬁt of statin therapy in the reduction of stroke risk even in the absence of hypercho-lesterolemia. Although anticoagulation is the treatment of choice for atrial ﬁbrillationand cardioembolic causes of stroke, there is no proven beneﬁt in regard to the preventionof atherothrombotic stroke; therefore, warfarin cannot be recommended.
XI-76. The answer is C.   (Chap. 30)   Head trauma is the most common etiology of a decreased
sense of smell in young adults and children. In most cases this is permanent, with only10% of these patients experiencing recovery. In older adults viral infections predominate.Parainﬂuenza virus type 3 is the most common associated virus. Patients with HIV alsofrequently have a distorted sense of smell, and this is associated with HIV wasting syn-drome. Although rare, genetic defects such as Kallmann syndrome and albinism are alsocauses of anosmia. Inﬂuenza virus is not a cause of anosmia.
XI-77. The answer is D.   (Chap. 363)   Phenytoin is a commonly used anticonvulsant. Its prin-
cipal use is in patients with tonic-clonic seizures. It may be given either orally or intrave-nously. Typical dosing is about 300 to 400 mg/d in adults. The therapeutic range isbetween 10 and 20 µg/mL. Neurologic side effects include dizziness, ataxia, diplopia, and
confusion. Systemic side effects include gum hyperplasia, hirsutism, facial coarsening,and osteomalacia. These patients may develop lymphadenopathy and Stevens-Johnsonsyndrome. T oxicity may be enhanced by liver disease and competition with other medi-cations. Phenytoin alters folate metabolism and is teratogenic. Leukopenia is not a typicalside effect and is seen more often with carbamazepine.
XI-78. The answer is C.   (Chap. 382)   The muscular dystrophies are hereditary progressive dis-
eases. Becker’s muscular dystrophy is a less severe form of X-linked recessive musculardystrophy than Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy. It occurs 10 times less frequently thanDMD. The underlying defect is in the same protein, dystrophin, which is part of a largecomplex of sarcolemmal proteins and glycoproteins. Clinically, Becker’s muscular dystro-phy (BMD) shows a similar pattern of proximal muscle weakness. Weakness becomesgeneralized with progression of the disease. Hypertrophy of muscles, particularly thecalves, is an early feature. Most patients experience the initial symptoms in the ﬁrst andsecond decades of life, but a later onset may occur. These patients have reduced life ex-pectancy but are signiﬁcantly more functional than are patients with DMD. Mental retar-dation may also occur in patients with BMD, and cardiac involvement may result incongestive heart failure. Serum creatinine kinase (CK) levels are elevated, and electrodi-agnostic ﬁndings are similar to those seen in DMD. The diagnosis is made by demon-strating a reduced amount of dystrophin on Western blot analysis.
XI-79. The answer is D.   (Chap. 16)   There are four indications for surgical repair of an inter-
vertebral disk herniation: objective progressive motor weakness, signs of spinal cordcompression (e.g., bowel or bladder incontinence), incapacitating nerve root pain despiteconservative treatment, and recurrent incapacitating nerve root pain. Absent deep ten-don reﬂexes, nighttime symptoms, and more than one level of disk herniation are notuncommon ﬁndings in patients with a disk herniation and do not mandate surgery.
XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS 455
XI-80. The answer is A.   (Chap. 23)   Episodic generalized weakness is caused by disorders of
the central nervous system (CNS) or the motor unit. Weakness from CNS disorders is
usually associated with altered consciousness or cognition, increased muscle tone and re-ﬂexes, and changes in sensation. Motor unit disorders include a variety of electrolyte dis-turbances (hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, hypercalcemia, hypernatremia, hyponatremia,hypophosphatemia, hypermagnesemia), inborn errors of metabolism (carbohydrate orfatty acid metabolism, mitochondrial function), toxins (botulism, curare), neuromuscu-lar junction disorders (myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome), and channelopa-thies (periodic paralysis). Transient ischemic attacks of the brainstem, but not in anyother part of the brain, may also cause episodic generalized weakness. Multiple sclerosismay cause episodic generalized weakness. Atherosclerotic occlusive carotid disease maycause focal but not generalized weakness.
XI-81. The answer is C.   (Chap. 361)   The patient in this scenario is demonstrating paratonia
(ﬂuctuating changes in resistance during testing of motor tone). Paratonia may be seen inpatients who have difﬁculty relaxing during the examination or may be evidence of aber-rant frontal lobe pathways, as in some forms of dementia. The patient has increased tone,making muscle injury less likely. Dystonia, as seen in parkinsonism, manifests as cogwheelrigidity and jerky interruptions of resistance without the focality that is seen in this sce-nario. Motor neuron diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, may present with ei-ther ﬂaccidity or spasticity. Usually patients with motor neuron disease have abnormalitiesthat can be elicited in more than one muscle group (although asymmetry is common).
XI-82. The answer is D.   (Chap. 377)   Ibuprofen, isoniazid, ciproﬂoxacin, tolmetin, sulfa-con-
taining medicines, and phenazopyridine have been implicated in drug hypersensitivityleading to meningitis. The cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) will typically show neutrophils, butmononuclear cells or eosinophils are occasionally present. Most causes of chronic (notrecurrent) meningitis cause a predominance of mononuclear cells. The differential forchronic meningitis is broad and a diagnosis is often difﬁcult to make. The treating physi-cian needs to consider a diverse array of viral, fungal, bacterial, mycobacterial, helmin-thic, and protozoal pathogens, both common and exotic, and therefore should obtain adetailed social history and consult an expert in the ﬁeld. Recurrent meningitis is oftendue to herpes simplex virus type 2 infection and this should be ruled out, particularly ifactive genital ulcers develop concurrently. Malignancy, sarcoidosis, and vasculitis are allpotential causes, and history, physical examination, and appropriate further testingshould dictate the degree to which these possibilities are explored. Medications are oftenoverlooked as a cause of chronic meningitis and should always be carefully considered.When CSF neutrophils predominate after 3 weeks of illness, nocardia, actinomyces, bru-cella, tuberculosis (<10% of cases), fungal, and noninfectious causes of chronic meningi-tis should be considered.
XI-83. The answer is E.   (Chaps. 27 and 365)   All the choices given in the question are causes of
or may be associated with dementia. Binswanger’s disease, the cause of which is unknown,often occurs in patients with long-standing hypertension and/or atherosclerosis; it is asso-ciated with diffuse subcortical white matter damage and has a subacute insidious course.Alzheimer’s disease, the most common cause of dementia, is also slowly progressive andcan be conﬁrmed at autopsy by the presence of amyloid plaques and neuroﬁbrillary tan-gles. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a prion disease, is associated with a rapidly progressive de-mentia, myoclonus, rigidity, a characteristic EEG pattern, and death within 1 to 2 years ofonset. Vitamin B
12 deﬁciency, which often is seen in the setting of chronic alcoholism,
most commonly produces a myelopathy that results in loss of vibration and joint positionsense and brisk deep tendon reﬂexes (dorsal column and lateral corticospinal tract dys-function). This combination of pathologic abnormalities in the setting of vitamin B
12 deﬁ-
ciency is also called subacute combined degeneration. Vitamin B 12 deﬁciency may also
lead to a subcortical type of dementia. Multi-infarct dementia, as in this case, presentswith a history of sudden stepwise declines in function associated with the accumulation ofbilateral focal neurologic deﬁcits. Brain imaging demonstrates multiple areas of stroke.
456 XI. N EUROLOGIC  DISORDERS  — ANSWERS
XI-84. The answer is B.   (Chap. 379)   Carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by entrapment of the
median nerve at the wrist. Symptoms begin with paresthesias in the median nerve distribu-
tion. With worsening, atrophy and weakness may develop. This condition is most com-monly caused by excessive use of the wrist. Rarely, systemic disease may result in carpaltunnel syndrome. This may be suspected when bilateral disease is apparent. T enosynovitiswith arthritis as in the case of rheumatoid arthritis and thickening of the connective tissueas in the case of amyloid or acromegaly are also causes. Other systemic diseases, such as hy-pothyroidism and diabetes mellitus, are also possible etiologies. Leukemia is not typicallyassociated with carpal tunnel syndrome.
457XII. DERMATOLOGY
QUESTIONS
DIRECTIONS:  Choose the one best  response to each question.
XII-1.    All of the following statements regarding atopic der-
matitis are true except
A. 80% of children with atopic dermatitis also coex-
press allergic rhinitis or asthma.
B. Exacerbations and remissions are typical.
C. Patients with atopic dermatitis often have increased
levels of circulating IgE.
D. The adult form of atopic dermatitis is commonly lo-
calized to the hands.
E. When one parent is affected with atopic dermatitis,
there is an 80% prevalence of atopic dermatitis inthe children.
XII-2.    A patient with acne vulgaris is considering treatment
with isotretinoin. Her acne has been refractory to oral an-tibiotics and topical washes. In addition to counseling re-garding the teratogenic effects of this medication, whichother side effect has been documented with isotretinoinfor the treatment of acne vulgaris?
A. Bradycardia
B. Cutaneous lymphomasC. Fugue stateD. HypertriglyceridemiaE. T ooth discoloration
XII-3.   A 42-year-old man recently returned from a 2-week
antelope hunting/camping trip to Tanzania. Near the endof the trip, he noted a painful sore on his foot that has be-come worse and is pictured in the ﬁgure (Color Atlas, Fig-ure XII-3). He is concerned about the possibility oftrypanosomiasis. Which of the following is most likely toyield a diagnosis? 
A. Light microscopy of ﬂuid from the skin lesion
B. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from the serumC. Serology from the serumD. Stool analysis for parasitesE. Urinary antigen testing
XII-4.    Androgen excess in women affects terminal hair growth
patterns. In states of androgen excess, the upper lip, chin,chest, upper arms, and thighs, for example, can become hir-sute. In the same person, however, hair growth on the scalpresembles male-pattern balding (androgenic alopecia). Whatbest describes the reason for the different effects of andro-gens on hair growth on the scalp compared to other areas?
A. Androgen levels in the scalp are lower than they are
in other parts of the body.
B. Hirsutism causes stress, which leads to male-pattern
balding.
C. In the scalp, androgen excess causes hair to spend
less time in the growth phase.
D. Sun-exposed areas tend to be less androgen-sensitive.
XII-5.   A 22-year-old woman comes to your ofﬁce con-
cerned about sun exposure. She brings a few sun block
creams into your ofﬁce and wants to know which one isbest for preventing wrinkling and blotchiness. She is lessconcerned about sunburn because she is trying to get abetter tan. Blocking which ultraviolet rays will achieveher desired result?
A. UV-A
B. UV-BC. Both UV-A and UV-B equallyD. Neither UV-A nor UV-B
XII-6.   Identify this skin lesion (see Color Atlas, Figure XII-6).
A. Herpes simplex virusB. Molluscum contagiosumC. ScabiesD. Tinea corporis
XII-7.   A 48-year-old diabetic man presents to the emergency
department complaining of blistering of the skin. Oneweek prior, he was seen by his cardiologist, where he wasstarted on a new blood pressure medication. His majorcomplaints are blisters on his arms, chest, and face andpruritus. On physical examination, he is afebrile. The“blisters” are actually shallow erosions associated with ery-thema, scale, and crust formation, Nikolsky’s sign isXII-4. (Continued)
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
458 XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS
present. There is no involvement of the scalp or any mu-
cous membranes. A skin biopsy reveals IgG on the surfaceof keratinocytes, and there is intraepidermal vesicle forma-tion. Much of the destruction is just beneath the stratumcorneum. Basal keratinocytes, and the epidermal base-ment membrane are spared. Anti-Dsg1 and anti-IgG anti-bodies are found in the peripheral blood. Which of thesestatements is true regarding the disease this patient has?
A. An endemic form of this disease is found in Latin
America and Tunisia.
B. This condition is likely to require plasmapheresis.
C. There is high likelihood that this patient has an oc-
cult Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
D. This patient also probably has a gluten-sensitive en-
teropathy.
XII-8.    Y ou are evaluating a 33-year-old woman complain-
ing of dry hands. She is a cleaning lady who has had theslow progression of erythema and edema, which hasevolved into ﬁssuring and crusting on the palmar aspectof the hand and wrist. She has been using gloves at work,with minimal improvement, and has started using lubri-cating creams. Her past medical history is signiﬁcant onlyfor seasonal allergic rhinitis. The hands appear to be theonly areas involved (see Color Atlas, Figure XII-8). Therest of her physical examination is normal. What is themost appropriate treatment for this patient at this time?
A. Cephalexin 250 mg orally 4 times a day for 7–10 days
B. High-potency topical steroidsC. Hydroxyzine, 25 mg orally every 6 hoursD. Oral prednisone (1 mg/kg) tapered over 2–3 weeksE. T opical retinoic acid
XII-9.    A 29-year-old man complains of a rash on his chest
(see Color Atlas, Figure XII-9). He has no other associ-ated symptoms and there is no pain or pruritus. It hasgrown slowly over the past 4 months. He is monogamousin a homosexual relationship and has never been testedfor HIV infection. He smokes tobacco occasionally. Hetakes no medications. On physical examination, he hasno other lesions and no lymphadenopathy. Which of thefollowing conditions do you expect this patient to have?
A. Hepatitis C infection
B. Human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) infectionC. Scabies infectionD. Staphylococcus aureus  colonization
E. Subacute bacterial endocarditis
XII-10.    A 28-year-old woman comes to your ofﬁce because
of hirsutism. She has dealt with this problem for the past4 months mainly by the use of waxing and bleaching, butthe hirsutism now involves her chest and she is rapidlydeveloping male-pattern balding. She has no other pastmedical history, is unmarried, and has no children. Shetakes no medications. She scores 18 on the Ferriman-Gallwey hirsutism scale (normal <8). What is the initialstep in her evaluation?
A. Dexamethasone suppression test
B. Measurement of total testosterone level C. Trial of laser phototherapyD. Trial of oral contraceptive pillsE. Spironolactone
XII-11.   The patient you are evaluating has had the rash on
her face shown in Figure XII-11 (Color Atlas) graduallygrow over the last 6 weeks. She complains of only slightpruritus but is mostly concerned about her appearance.The lesions are not painful. Her past medical history isunremarkable and on review of systems she has dandruff.All of the following historic features are likely except
A. difﬁculty rising from a seated positionB. HIV infectionC. improvement with antidandruff shampooD. lesions worsen with emotional stressE. serum antibodies to Malassezia furfur
XII-12.   A 52-year-old man is concerned about changes in
the appearance of his skin. He has developed thick skinon his forearms, face, and the dorsum of his hands. Heoccasionally develops vesicles and bullae that will rup-ture, leaving moist erosions that heal slowly. He has no-ticed increased hair growth in these areas as well. Pastmedical history is signiﬁcant for hepatitis C infection thathe cleared spontaneously 3 years ago. He takes no medi-cations. He drinks alcohol socially. His skin lesions areshown in Figure XII-12 (see Color Atlas). What is the besttreatment option for this patient?
A. β-carotene
B. Fluconazole
C. GlucocorticoidsD. PhlebotomyE. UV-A and UV-B protection
XII-13.   What disease is likely causing this facial rash (see
Color Atlas, Figure XII-13)?
A. Dermatomyositis
B. Rheumatoid arthritis C. SarcoidD. SclerodermaE. Systemic lupus erythematosus
XII-14.   Y ou are evaluating a patient with a chronic rash who
comes in for treatment. The patient is a 28-year-old manwho complains of chronically pruritic skin with scaly,plaque-like eruptions on the knees, gluteal cleft, and scalp.He has also noticed “potholes” in his ﬁngernails bilaterally.On review of systems, he also notes early-morning backpain, which improves with movement, and intense dan-druff. The scalp lesions have signiﬁcantly limited his qual-ity of life due to the constant scaling. He has no other pastXII-10. (Continued) XII-7. (Continued)
XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — QUESTIONS 459
medical history and has never been treated for this before.
When considering possible treatment regimens for thisdisorder, all of the following may be considered except
A. acitretinB. cyclosporineC. methotrexateD. prednisoneE. UV light therapy
XII-15.    A 32-year-old woman receives amoxicillin/clavula-
nate for presumed bacterial sinusitis. One week later shepresents with a diffuse itchy rash (see Color Atlas, FigureXII-15). Her mucus membranes are normal. Which ofthe following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Morbilliform drug eruption
B. Pemphigus vulgarisC. Stevens-Johnson syndromeD. T oxic shock syndromeE. Urticaria
XII-16.    A patient comes into your ofﬁce to see you about
the intensely pruritic rash (see Color Atlas, Figure XII-16). The rash started with intense burning sensations 24h prior to the eruptions. On examination of the skin, in-volved areas are mostly the extensor surfaces of the skin.Mucous membranes are spared. There are many areas ofexcoriation on top of the papulovesicular lesions. Y oumake a diagnosis and initiate treatment with dapsone andadvise the patient to refrain from gluten-containingfoods. The patient returns to your clinic 2 months laterand has improved greatly. Which other condition is thispatient likely to have?
A. Ankylosing spondylitis
B. Atrophic gastritisC. Carpal tunnel syndromeD. Type 1 diabetes mellitus
XII-17.    Y ou have been managing a patient with a severe
case of tinea pedis with oral therapy. Two weeks into thetreatment course, the patient develops thickened andopaciﬁed nails on the right hand. The left hand ﬁnger-nails are affected to a lesser degree. The nails have becomediscolored and have signiﬁcant debris under the nail. Nailscrapings from the ﬁngernails are most likely to growwhich organism?A. Candida  spp.
B. Malassezia  spp.
C. Rhizopogon  spp.
D. Trichophyton  spp.
XII-18.    A patient presents to you for evaluation of this le-
sion, which has been on his skin for 6 months. The lesionbegan as a red papule with a thick adherent scale (seeColor Atlas, Figure XII-18). Since that time, it has pro-gressed to the current pictured lesion with raised bordersand scars. There has been no improvement with use oftopical glucocorticoids, which the patient borrowed froma friend. What is the best course of action for this patientat this time?
A. Aminoquinoline antimalarials
B. AzathioprineC. Systemic glucocorticoidsD. Vitamin E ointmentE. Wide surgical excision with regional lymph node
dissection
XII-19.    During a trip to Afghanistan, you are asked to see a
young woman with the following lesion on her face (seeColor Atlas, Figure XII-19). She is otherwise healthy andstates that the lesion has been there for 3 weeks. Otherfamily members have had similar lesions on their armsand feet. She has no shortness of breath, fevers, chills, orweight loss. This is the only lesion on her body. Based onlocal epidemiology and light microscopy of a skin biopsy,you diagnose leishmaniasis. What is the mode of trans-mission of this parasite?
A. Inhalation of spores
B. Mosquito biteC. Sandﬂy biteD. Tsetse ﬂy biteE. Undercooked pork
XII-20.    Which of the following comorbid conditions is a
relative contraindication for the use of oral agents fortreating onychomycosis of the toenails?
A. Chronic kidney disease 
B. HepatitisC. LeukopeniaD. Poorly controlled diabetes mellitusE. SchizophreniaXII-17. (Continued) XII-14. (Continued)
460XII. DERMATOLOGY
ANSWERS
XII-1. The answer is E.   (Chap. 53)   The clinical course of atopic dermatitis (AD) is charac-
terized by exacerbations and remissions. Lesions are typically pruritic and appear simi-
lar to those of eczematous dermatitis. Patients with AD have increased production ofIgE and increased serum levels. Delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions, however, areimpaired. Most children with AD also have atopy manifested as allergic rhinitis, as-thma, food allergies, or eczema. When both parents have AD, >80% of their childrenwill have AD. When only one parent is affected, the prevalence falls to ~50%. Half of allchildren will continue to suffer with AD into adulthood. The distribution may be thesame as in childhood, but more commonly the disease becomes localized, such as inhand eczema.
XII-2. The answer is D.   (Chap. 53)   Due to the well-known teratogenic effects of retinoic acid
derivatives, all patients must be enrolled in a program designed to prevent pregnancy be-fore initiation of a treatment regimen. Moreover, negative pregnancy tests must be ob-tained prior to each prescription reﬁll. In addition, patients with a personal or familyhistory of hypertriglyceridemia or a personal history of diabetes should be cautionedabout the risks of hypertriglyceridemia and poor glucose control. Serum triglyceridesshould be followed during therapy. Concerns regarding a link between isotretinoin useand developing depression have not been proven. T ooth discoloration is a risk in childrenwho receive tetracycline or related antibiotics.
XII-3. The answer is A.   (Chap. 206)   Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is due to infec-
tion by the ﬂagellated protozoan Trypanosoma brucei gambiense  (West African) or T.
brucei rhodesiense  (East African). It is transmitted by the bite of the tsetse ﬂy. Both or-
ganisms may lead to fatal neurologic impairment (sleeping sickness) if not treated.HAT usually presents with a trypanosomal chancre that is painful and located at thesite of inoculation. An acute febrile illness usually follows due to hematogenous andlymphatic dissemination. East African HAT is generally more acute than West AfricanHAT. Central nervous system manifestations may occur within a year for East AfricanHAT and in months to years for West African HAT. The deﬁnitive diagnosis for HATrequires identiﬁcation of the parasite. Efforts should be made to examine blood, ﬂuidfrom sores, lymph node aspirate, and/or cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Fluid from the chancremay show the protozoite by direct examination or by Giemsa stain. PCR tests havebeen developed, but none are commercially available. Serologic tests vary in their sen-sitivity and speciﬁcity and are not recommended as tools to impact treatment. Stoolanalysis does not have a role in the diagnosis of HAT. Treatment of early-stage East Af-rican HAT is with suramin.
XII-4. The answer is C.   (Chap. 50)   There are three phases in the cycle of hair growth—the
growth, involution, and rest. Androgen excess in women leads to increased hair growthin most androgen-sensitive sites. In the scalp, however, hair loss occurs because andro-gens cause the hair to spend less time in the growth phase. Male-pattern balding maycause stress but is primarily caused by high androgen levels. Androgen levels are equallydistributed throughout the body; it is the local environment that dictates the end-organeffect. Sun-exposed areas, such as the face and arms, are as androgen-sensitive as non-exposed areas.
XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 461
XII-5. The answer is A.   (Chap. 57)   The UV spectrum reaching the earth is arbitrarily divided
into two major segments: UV-A and UV-B. The outermost epidermal layer, the stratum
corneum, is a major absorber of UV-B, and <10% of incident UV-B wavelengths pene-trate through the epidermis to the dermis. In contrast, UV-A readily penetrates to thedermis. Photons in the UV-B are 1000-fold more efﬁcient than photons in the UV-A inevoking the sunburn response. UV-B is primarily responsible for the sunburn response
and for vitamin D photochemistry. UV-A is important in the pathogenesis of photoagingin human skin.
XII-6. The answer is B.   (Chap. e10)   Molluscum contagiosum classically presents with umbili-
cated papules, as seen in this photo. A vesicular lesion with an inﬂammatory base is char-acteristic of herpes simplex. Tinea corporis presents with a circular, scaly plaque. Scabieslesions are frequently found in interdigital web spaces and usually consist of inﬂamma-tory papules.
XII-7. The answer is C.   (Chap. 55)   This patient has pemphigus foliaceus (PF), an autoim-
mune cutaneous disorder similar to pemphigus vulgaris (PV). PF is distinguished fromPV by the fact that PF is a more superﬁcial disorder than PV . The acantholytic blisters inPF are located high in the epidermis, usually just below the stratum corneum. In PF, mu-cous membranes are always spared. Fogo selvagem  is the endemic form of PF. PF is associ-
ated with several autoimmune diseases; however, its association with thymoma and/ormyasthenia gravis is most notable. Patients can develop PF after exposure to drugs con-taining a thiol group (e.g., penicillamine, captopril, enalapril). PF usually responds totopical or systemic glucocorticoids. PV is often associated with lymphoreticular malig-nant diseases such as lymphoma or Hodgkin’s disease.
XII-8. The answer is B.   (Chap. 53)   This patient has irritant contact dermatitis. Most pa-
tients have a history of atopy. Contact dermatitis usually resolves with removal of theoffending agent or with barrier protection (e.g., gloves) of the involved area. Whencrusting and ﬁssuring are present, lubricating creams are helpful. Adjunctive therapiesinclude high-potency topical steroids while the dermatitis runs its course. For patientswho fail topical steroids, systemic therapy with oral prednisone will usually sufﬁce.Hydroxyzine, an oral antihistamine, is useful when pruritus is a predominant com-plaint or when the lesion is thought to be due to scratching or rubbing, as in lichensimplex chronicus. Empirical antibiotics are not useful in the absence of signs of in-fection. T opical retinoic acid is an irritant and will worsen the skin inﬂammation anddiscomfort.
XII-9. The answer is B.   (Chaps. 94 and 182)   The lesion shown is Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS). The
lesion is also commonly found on the extremities, face, and in the oral cavity. It typi-cally appears as painless purple/brown macules, plaques, and nodules. They may beconfused with other pigmented lesions. KS is the only sarcoma associated with a virus(HHV-8). The most common presentation is in patients infected with HIV , usuallywith advanced immunosuppression with CD4+ T cell counts <200/ µL. Folliculitis due
to Staphylococcus aureus  causes more pain and redness. The cutaneous embolic or im-
munologic manifestations of bacterial endocarditis are smaller and typically found inthe extremities. Hepatitis C infection may cause skin lesions due to cryoglobulinemia;however, these appear as vasculitic lesions typically on the lower extremities. There isno relation between hepatitis C infection and KS. Scabies infection will cause itchypapules and burrows.
XII-10. The answer is B.   (Chap. 50)   Hirsutism is a common outpatient complaint and may
be caused by hyperandrogenism, endocrine disorders, pregnancy, drugs, or congenitalabnormalities. This patient has rapidly progressive virilization and concern should bepresent for a virilizing tumor. A number of options exist to rule out a virilizing tumorincluding measurement of the testosterone level or dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate(DHEAS) level. Further imaging will localize a mass, if present, in the adrenals or ova-ries. Empirical therapy with an oral contraceptive or with spironolactone would be in-
462 XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
dicated if the laboratory and radiographic evaluation does not reveal a virilizing tumor.
Laser therapy will be effective at removing the hair, but the long-term effects are yet tobe determined. As shown in the ﬁgure, dexamethasone suppression is useful to distin-guish adrenal versus ovarian causes of excess androgens and may be utilized after as-sessing testosterone and DHEAS.
XII-11. The answer is A.   (Chap. 53)   Seborrheic dermatitis is a common skin disorder, for which
the majority of patients lack any predisposing conditions. It is characterized by greasy scalesoverlying erythematous plaques or patches. Induration and scale are less prominent than inpsoriasis. The lesions are variably pruritic and may either improve or worsen with sunlightexposure. Pruritus is also variable. The most common location is the scalp, where it maymanifest as severe dandruff. On the face, the most common locations are the eyebrows, eye-lids, glabella, and nasolabial folds. Lesions typically worsen in the winter, and emotionalstress also seems to exacerbate the rash. Seborrheic dermatitis is commonly seen in patientswith Parkinson’s disease, facial nerve palsies, and HIV infection. The pathogenesis remainsunclear but the yeast Malassezia furfur  appears to play a role. Successful treatment with top-
ical ketoconazole and the prevalence of the disease in immunocompromised patients sug-gests that the yeast is pathogenic. Patients with dermatomyositis may exhibit a heliotroperash (violaceous rash around the eyelids) and may complain of proximal muscle weakness.
XII-12. The answer is D.   (Chap. 57)   This patient has porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT). The de-
scription and appearance are classic for this disease, and a history of hepatitis C virus in-fection is an independent risk factor for PCT. Treatment consists of repeated phlebotomyto diminish excessive hepatic iron stores. β-carotene is a treatment option for erythropoi-
etic protoporphyria which is differentiated from PCT by the acute photosensitivity, burn-ing, and stinging that occurs after sun exposure in the former. UV protection is notspeciﬁcally part of the treatment of PCT but is helpful for preventing the photoaging pro-cess. This is not an autoimmune process where glucocorticoids would potentially be ofbeneﬁt. Secondary fungal infections may occur that require antifungal therapy.
XII-13. The answer is A.   (Chap. e10)   This image demonstrates the heliotrope rash of dermato-
myositis. Lupus and sarcoid can both present with facial rashes; however, the periorbitalinvolvement seen here is more associated with dermatomyositis. Rheumatoid arthritisand scleroderma are not distinctly associated with facial rashes.FIGURE XII-10 Algorithm for the evaluation and
differential diagnosis of hirsutism. ACTH, adreno-
corticotropic hormone; CAH, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia; DHEAS, sulfated form of dehydroepi-
androsterone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome.CLINICAL EVALUATION OF HIRSUTISM
Idiopathic
Other causes see
HPIM, 17e, Table 50-1• Nonclassic CAH
• Functional adrenal  hyperandrogenismLaboratory Evaluation• Total, free testosterone• DHEASReassuranceNonpharmacologic approachesHirsutismsignificantVirilizationRapid progression
Rule out ovarian oradrenal neoplasm
Normal
Increased
Final diagnosis
• PCOS• Functional ovarian  hyperandrogenismTreat empirically   orConsider further testing• Dexamethasone suppression → adrenal vs ovarian causes; R/O Cushing’s• ACTH stimulation → assess nonclassic CAHMarked elevation
Total testosterone > 7 nmol/L
(>2 ng/mL)DHEAS > 18.5 µmol/L (> 7000 µg/L)
Ye sNo
XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS 463
XII-14. The answer is D.   (Chap. 53)   Psoriasis is a common chronic inﬂammatory skin disease.
It is characterized by erythematous, sharply demarcated papules and rounded plaques
covered by a silvery scale. The lesions are highly pruritic. Traumatized areas often developlesions (Koebner phenomenon). Infections, stress, and medications may exacerbate pso-riasis. Fingernail lesions such as pitting, onycholysis, or nail thickening or subungual hy-perkeratosis are present in 50% of patients. T opical treatment options for psoriasisinclude mid-potency glucocorticoids, vitamin D analogues, retinoids, and ultravioletlight. Systemic therapy is reserved for severe or widespread disease. Oral glucocorticoidsshould not be used for the treatment of psoriasis due to the life-threatening risk of devel-oping pustular psoriasis when therapy is discontinued. Systemic therapies approved bythe U.S. Food and Drug Administration include methotrexate, retinoids, calcineurin in-hibitors, and biologic agents (anti-tumor necrosis factor, anti-CD11a, anti-CD2).
XII-15. The answer is A.   (Chap. 56)   Morbilliform drug eruptions are the most common drug
reactions. They typically begin on the trunk and consist of symmetric macules and pap-ules that may become conﬂuent. Moderate to severe pruritus is common. In contrast toStevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic shock syndrome, involvement of the mucus mem-branes is uncommon. The principal differential diagnosis is viral exanthem, particularlyin children. The rash usually develops within 1 week of initiation of therapy and resolveswith discontinuation. The most common drugs that cause morbilliform eruptions in-clude penicillin derivatives, allopurinol, sulfonamides, and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂamma-tories. Urticaria consists of superﬁcial well-deﬁned wheals that are pruritic. Penicillinsmay cause IgE-mediated urticaria. Pemphigus is an autoimmune bullous disease of theskin and mucus membranes that is rarely associated with drugs such as penicillin.
XII-16. The answer is B.   (Chap. 55)   The patient has classic symptoms of dermatitis herpetifor-
mis (DH)—an intensely pruritic rash that is sometimes heralded by burning sensations24 h prior to arrival of the rash. Biopsy of this lesion would show neutrophil-rich inﬁl-trates in the dermal papillae. Over 90% of patients with DH express the HLA-B8/DRw3and HLA-DQw2 haplotypes. Ankylosing spondylitis is associated with expression ofHLA-B27. Patients with DH also have a high incidence of thyroid abnormalities, achlo-rhydria, atrophic gastritis, and antigastric parietal cell autoantibodies. There is no associ-ation with carpal tunnel syndrome or type 1 diabetes mellitus.
XII-17. The answer is D.   (Chap. 53)   Dermatophytes that commonly infect the skin, hair, and
nails include members of the genera Trichophyton ,Epidermophyton , and Microsporum .
Tinea pedis is commonly associated with tinea manuum, unguium, or cruris (dermato-phytosis of the hands, nails, or groin, respectively). Scratching the foot with the hand is acommon mode of spreading the infection. Malassezia  spp. is the pathologic agent in tinea
versicolor and is thought to be pathogenic in seborrheic dermatitis. Candidal onychomy-cosis usually occurs only in the immunocompromised host or with chronic mucocutane-ous candidiasis.
XII-18. The answer is A.   (Chap. 55)   The patient has discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) or
chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus. It is characterized by discrete lesions most oftenon the face, scalp, or ears. The lesions are usually erythematous papules or plaques with athick scale that occludes hair follicles. The lesions persist for years and grow slowly. Lessthan 10% of patients with DLE meet criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), al-though skin lesions are common in patients with SLE. Chronically, the lesions evolve tolook similar to the one pictured. Treatment consists of topical or intralesional glucocorti-coids. If that is ineffective, systemic therapy with an aminoquinoline antimalarial may beindicated. Systemic glucocorticoids or immunosuppressives are not indicated for local-ized disease. Although malignant melanoma may take on myriad appearances, the loca-tion, progress, and description of this lesion is more suggestive of discoid lupus,therefore, surgical excision and lymph node dissection are not indicated at this time. Vi-tamin E ointment has no proven role in the treatment of DLE.
464 XII. D ERMATOLOGY  — ANSWERS
XII-19. The answer is C.   (Chap. 205)   Lesions of cutaneous leishmaniasis progress from pap-
ules to plaques to atrophic scars with central necrosis and ulceration. Multiple primary
lesions, regional adenopathy, and secondary bacterial infection are variably present.Leishmania  parasites are transmitted by the bite of the female phlebotomine sandﬂy.
While probing for a blood meal, sandﬂies regurgitate the parasite’s ﬂagellated promasti-gote stage into the host’s skin, which eventually get phagocytized by macrophages. Thelarvae of Trichinella spiralis  are found in undercooked pork and game meat and cause the
syndrome of trichonosis. Inhalation of the spores of Bacillus anthracis  causes the pulmo-
nary form of anthrax infection. The tsetse ﬂy is the vector for the trypanosome parasite,which can cause sleeping sickness. Mosquito bites transmit a number of infections, mostnotably malaria and a variety of viral infections such as viral encephalitis.
XII-20. The answer is B.   (Chap. 53)   Oral antifungal agents are required for effective treatment
of dermaphytosis of the hair or nails. Treatment requires prolonged courses of drug (e.g.,2–18 months) and exposes the patient to an increased risk of adverse reaction to thedrug. All of the oral agents carry a risk of hepatotoxicity. They should not be used inwomen who are pregnant or breast-feeding. Griseofulvin is approved for dermatophyteinfections of the skin, hair, or nails. Itraconazole and terbinaﬁne are approved for ony-chomycosis. With terbinaﬁne therapy, there is also a risk of drug-drug interaction withdrugs that require the P450 enzyme for metabolism. Most treatment courses require se-rial monitoring of liver enzymes to avoid drug-induced hepatitis or liver failure.
465REFERENCES
Adrogué HJ, Madias NE: Management of life-threatening
acid–base disorders. N Engl J Med  338:26–34, 1998
Baker DG, Schumacher HR, Jr: Acute monoarthritis. N Engl
J Med 329:1013–1020, 1993
Bennett CL: Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura associ-
ated with clopidogrel. J Am Coll Cardiol  50:1138, 2007
Beral V et al: Breast cancer and breastfeeding. Lancet  360:
187–195, 2002
Brickner ME, Hillis LD, Lange RA: Congenital heart disease
in adults. N Engl J Med 342:256–263, 2000
Camm AJ, Garratt CJ: Adenosine and supraventricular
tachycardia. N Engl J Med  325:1621–1629, 1991
Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer:
Breast cancer and breast feeding: Collaborative reanaly-
sis of individual data from 47 epidemiologic studies in30 countries, including 50302 women with breast can-cer and 96973 women without the disease. Lancet  360:
187–195, 2002
Crapo R et al: Arterial blood gas reference values for sea level
and an altitude of 1400 meters. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med  160:1525–1531, 1999 
Dezee KJ et al: Treatment of excessive anticoagulation with
phytonadione (Vitamin K): A meta-analysis. Arch Intern
Med  166:391–397, 2006 
Duggan C et al: Inherited and acquired risk factors for
venous thromboembolic disease among women takingtamoxifen to prevent breast cancer. J Clin Oncol  21:
3588–3593, 2003
Eagle KA et al: ACC/AHA guideline update for perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery—ex-ecutive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol  39:542, 2002
Frank MM: Complement in the pathophysiology of human
disease. N Engl J Med  316:1523–1530, 1987
Hahn AF: The challenge of respiratory dysfunction in Guil-
lain-Barré syndrome. Arch Neurol 58(6):871–872, 2001
Ifudu O: Care of patients undergoing hemodialysis. N Engl J
Med  339:1054–1062, 1998Laffey JG et al: Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as com-
pared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung in-jury. N Engl J Med  343:812–814, 2000
Lawn ND et al: Anticipating mechanical ventilation in Guil-
lain-Barré syndrome. Arch Neurol  58:893–898, 2001
Lee TH et al: Derivation and prospective validation of a sim-
ple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncar-diac surgery. Circulation  100:1043, 1999
Loftus EV: Microscopic colitis: Epidemiology and treatment.
Am J Gastroenterol  98(12 Suppl):S31–S36, 2003
The Matisse Investigators: Subcutaneous fondaparinux versus in-
travenous unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment ofpulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med  349:1695–1702, 2003
Morris TA et al: No difference in risk for thrombocytopenia
during treatment of pulmonary embolism and deepvenous thrombosis with either low-molecular-weightheparin or unfractionated heparin: A metaanalysis.Chest 132:1131, 2007
Ost D, Fein AM, Feinsilver SH: The solitary pulmonary nod-
ule. N Engl J Med  348:2535–2542, 2003
Ridker PM, et al: Mutation in the gene coding for coagula-
tion factor V and the risk of myocardial infarction,stroke, and venous thrombosis in apparently healthymen. N Engl J Med 332:912, 1995
Rubin HR et al: Patient ratings of dialysis care with peritoneal
dialysis versus hemodialysis. JAMA  291:321–333, 2002
Shen J et al: Polymorphic makers of the glycogen debranching
enzyme gene allowing linkage analysis in families with gly-cogen storage disease type III. J Med Genet  34:34–38, 1997
Smith RA et al: American Cancer Society Guidelines for the early
detection of cancer, 2004. CA Cancer J Clin 54:41–52, 2004
Smitt PS et al: Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia due to auto-
antibodies against a glutamate receptor. N Engl J Med
342:21–27, 2000
Wilt TJ et al: Saw palmetto extracts for treatment of benign
prostatic hyperplasia: A systematic review. JAMA 280:
1604–1609, 1998
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
NOTES
COLOR ATLAS
Figure III-21
Figure II-3
Copyright © 2008, 2005, 2001, 1998, 1994, 1991, 1987 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Click here for terms of use. 
COLOR  ATLAS
Figure III-6
Figure IV-2
Figure IV-57
Figure IV-121

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure VI-32
Figure IV-158
Figure VI-30
Figure V-115

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure XI-62 Figure X-14
Figure XII-6
Figure XII-3

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure XII-8
Figure XII-11
Figure XII-9

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure XII-13
Figure XII-12
Figure XII-15

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure XII-19
Figure XII-16
Figure XII-18

COLOR  ATLAS
Figure I-36
Figure VIII-76
Figure IX-49

